Department of Applied Mechanics
ApL100 Engineering Mechanics Rotation of a fluid particle, Vorticity and Circulation, Stream Function,
4 Credits (3-1-0) Irrotational flow and Velocity Potential function. DYNAMICS OF AN
IDEAL FLUID: Continuity and Euler’s Equations of Motion, Bernoulli
Kinematics, Statics, Equations of Motion, Rigid body dynamics,
Equation, Applications to Flow Measurement and other real flow
Introduction to variational mechanics.
problems. MECHANICS OF VISCOUS FLOW: Navier Stokes equations,
ApL101 Applied Mathematics in Engineering Applications exact solutions, Laminar flow through a pipe, Turbulent flow through
a pipe, Friction factor, Applications to Pipe Networks. DIMENSIONAL
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ANALYSIS: Similarity of motion, Dimensionless numbers, Modeling
Ordinary Differential Equation: Second order ODEs, Method of
of fluid flows, Applications. INTEGRAL ANALYSIS: Reynolds Transport
Undetermined Coefficients, Variation of Parameters, Strum-Liouville
Theorem, Control Volume Analysis.
eigenvalue problem, Difference equation. Partial Differential Equation:
Solid Mechanics: State of stress at a point, equations of motion,
Classification of PDEs, Heat, Wave and Laplace Equations, Separation
principal stress, maximum shear stress. Concept of strain, strain
of variables to solve PDEs. Fourier Transform: Fourier sine transform,
displacement relations, compatibility conditions, principal strains,
Fourier cosine Transform, Technique for solving ODEs and PDEs.
transformation of stress/strain tensor, state of plane stress/strain.
Probability Theory: Axioms of probability, Conditional probability,
Constitutive relations, uniaxial tension test, idealized stress-strain
Random variable, Uncertainty in engineering system, Discrete and
diagrams, isotropic linear elastic and elasto-plastic materials. Energy
Continuous distributions, Distribution function, Joint probability
Methods. Uniaxial stress and strain analysis of bars, thermal stresses,
distribution, Moments, Covariance, Correlation coefficient. Stochastic
Torsion, Bending, Stability of Equilibrium.
Processes: Definition of Stochastic process, Stochastic FE model,
Stationary process, Markov chain, Poisson process. ApL106 Fluid Mechanics
4 Credits (3-1-0)
ApL103 Experimental Methods
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Experimental Analysis: Types of measurements and errors, Overlaps with: APL107, APL105
Relative frequency distribution, Histogram, True value, Precision of Introduction to Fluids and the concept of viscosity, Flow visualization,
measurement, Method of least squares, the curve fitting, General Fluid Statics, Physical laws for a control volume including continuity,
linear regression,Theory of errors, Binomial and Gaussian distribution, momentum and energy equations, Bernoulli equation, Differential
Chi-square test. equations of fluid motion, Navier Stokes equations, vorticity and
Experimental Methods: Principles of Measurement, Basic Elements potential flows, dimensional analysis and similitude, Boundary layer
of a Measuring Device. theory, 1-D compressible flow.
Displacement measurement,Force and Torque Measurement,
ApL107 Mechanics of Fluids
Temperature Measurement, Pressure Measurement, Fluid Velocity
Measurement, Miscellaneous measurements. 5 Credits (3-1-2)
Dynamics of Measurements: Dynamic Response of a Measuring Pre-requisite(s): APL100
Instrument, Response to Transient and Periodic Signals, First and
Overlaps with: APL106, APL105
Second order systems as well as their Dynamic Response Characteristics.
Introduction to Fluids and the concept of viscosity, Flow visualization,
Laboratory: The experiments have been designed to understand
Fluid Statics, Physical laws for a control volume including continuity,
Experimental Analysis physically. Laboratory will enable the students
momentum and energy equations, Bernoulli equation, Differential
to apply various statistical methodologies (viz. Mean, Median,
equations of fluid motion, Navier Stokes equations, vorticity and
Mode, Std Dev. etc) to get the optimum output from the day to day
potential flows, dimensional analysis and similitude, Boundary layer
Engineering life experiment.
theory, viscous flow in ducts and applications to turbomachinery.
Laboratory experiments will demonstrate the concepts learnt in the
ApL104 Solid Mechanics
theory and appreciation of their limitations.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
ApL108 Mechanics of Solids
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
5 Credits (3-1-2)
Overlaps with: APL105, APL108
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
Introduction, State of stress at a point, equations of motion, principal
stress, maximum shear stress. Concept of strain, strain displacement Overlaps with: APL104, APL105
relations, compatibility conditions, principal strains, transformation of Introduction, State of stress at a point, equations of motion, principal
stress/strain tensor, state of plane stress/strain. Constitutive relations, stress, maximum shear stress. Concept of strain, strain displacement
uniaxial tension test, idealized stress-strain diagrams, isotropic linear relations, compatibility conditions, principal strains, transformation of
elastic, viscoelastic and elasto-plastic materials. Energy Methods. stress/strain tensor, state of plane stress/strain. Constitutive relations,
Uniaxial stress and strain analysis of bars, thermal stresses, Torsion, uniaxial tension test, idealized stress-strain diagrams, isotropic linear
Bending and shear stresses in beams, deflection of beams, stability elastic, viscoelastic and elasto-plastic materials. Energy Methods.
of equilibrium configuration. Uniaxial stress and strain analysis of bars, thermal stresses, Torsion,
Bending and shear stresses in beams, deflection of beams, stability
ApL105 Mechanics of Solids and Fluids of equilibrium configuration.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
ApL190 Design Engineering
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Overlaps with: APL104, APL106, APL107, APL108 Modern Design Cycle, Craftsman versus Designer, Need Analysis
Fluid Mechanics MATHEMATICAL PRELIMINARIES: Cartesian Tensors, and Broad Engineering Specifications, Concept Design, Feasibility
Index Notation, Integral Theorems. INTRODUCTION: Basic Concepts study and Evaluation of alternatives, Engineering Economics,
and Definitions, Solids and Fluids, Internal and external forces on Modelling Techniques-Mathematical, Graphical, iconic, solid, Analysis
a fluid element. PROPERTIES OF FLUID: Rheological Equation and and Simulation (FEM, Monte Carlo, CFD, Dimensional analysis,
Classification of fluids, Normal and Shear Stresses, Concept of Experimental Techniques), Material Selection (strength, stiffness,
Pressure, pressure gradient. STATICS OF FLUIDS: Types of Forces fatigue life consideration), Manufacturing Processes and Design for
on Fluid Element, Mechanics of Fluid at Rest and in rigid body Manufacture, Reliability/Availability/Maintainability, Sustainability
motion, Manometry, forces on fully and partially submerged bodies, and Environment, Safety, Ergonomics and Human Factors, Detailed
stability of a floating body. KINEMATICS OF FLUID MOTION: Types Drawings/Assembly Drawings/Assembly Instructions /Maintenance
of fluid motion, Stream lines, Streak and path lines, Acceleration and Manuals, Case Studies.
111

Applied Mechanics Courses of Study 2024-2025
ApL203 Dynamics of Mechanical Systems of eigenvalues; Direct and indirect methods of solution of linear
4 Credits (3-1-0) equations; Emphasis will be on using the finite difference method
(FDM) to solve problems in solid and fluid mechanics.
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
Overlaps with: MCL111, MCL731 ApL302 Basics of product Design
Principles of Dynamics: Newton's laws and d'Alembert's principle; 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Energy methods; Generalized Dynamics: Kinematics and Kinetics,
Overlaps with: APL775
Kane's Equations and Lagrange's Equations. Introduction to Vibration
with examples; Stability; Balancing; Cams and Gears; Introduction to Design Methods- Introduction, identification of customer needs,
Multibody Dynamics; Robot Dynamics; Application with Biosystems; product specifications, concept generation & selection concept
Human Body Dynamics. testing, product generation and prototype/model testing. Product
Design Human factors in engineering, Man-Machine systems, Human
ApL205 Basics of Computer Aided Design Sensorimotor, Active and Passive Interaction, Sense organs: Capabilities
and Limitations, Visual and Auditory Display Systems. Anthropometry,
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Physical capabilities. Effect of Environment, Air pollution, Motion,
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 or equivalent, MTL107 Noise Vibrations, Allocation of functions between man and machine,
Principles of computer aided design, Computer graphics fundamentals, work place design, human error, accidents and safety. Feasibility –
2D and3DTransformationsand projections, Plane Curves, Space Introduction, prefeasibility study, market analysis, technical analysis,
Curves, Synthetic curves. Analytical and parametric surfaces, Synthetic financial analysis and feasibility report. Practical – To fabricate a
surfaces, Solid Modeling basics, Solid modeling techniques and working prototype/model following all the steps of feasibility study
schemes, Half-spaces, Boundary Representation (B-rep), Constructive preliminary and details design and the concepts of design methods.
Solid Geometry (CSG), Sweep Modeling, Analytical Solid Modeling,
Visual Realism, hidden line sand surface. ApV303 Mechanics of Cricket
1 Credit (1-0-0)
ApL206 Engineering Thermodynamics
Pre-requisite(s): APL100, APL104, APL106
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Human Mechanics (shoulder Joint During Wrist-spin bowing, biceps
Overlaps with: MCL140
brachii muscle during fast bowling), Fluid Mechanics (Conventional
Basic concepts and definitions, thermodynamic properties of a pure and reverse swing bowling), Structure and mechan-ical properties
substance. Work and heat – definition and applications. 1st Law – of cricket ball and bat, Solid Mechanics (oblique impact of ball on
internal energy and enthalpy, applications to non-flow/closed and pitch and ball on bat).
flow/open systems (SSSF and USUF). 2nd Law – corollaries, Claudius
inequality, entropy. Carnot cycle. Basics of gas-vapor mixtures.
ApL306 Vibrations
Vapor power cycles – Rankine cycle and its modifications. Steam
generation and its use – power plants, co-generation, combined 3 Credits (3-0-0)
cycles. Thermodynamic analysis of fluids in standard fixtures and Pre-requisite(s): APL104 O
equipment (piping fixtures, power plants, engines, refrigerators).
Overlaps with: CVL759, MCL733
Equilibrium properties of pure materials and mixtures. Understanding
the phase behavior and phase transitions of pure fluids. Axioms, Euler angles, equations of motion, kinematics and dynamics
of constrained rigid bodies. Free vibration response of single-degree-
of-freedom (SDOF) systems, undamped and damped vibration. Forced
ApL207 Heat Transfer
response of SDOF system, response to periodic excitation, impulse
2 Credits (2-0-0)
response, response to arbitrary excitation, convolution integral,
Overlaps with: CLL251, MCL242, ESL760 and shock spectrum. Two degrees-of-freedom systems, orthogonality
Modes of heat transfer - conduction, convection, radiation; Basic of modes, harmonic response, vibration absorbers. Multi-degrees-of-
conservation equations; Conduction: Fourier’s law, heat diffusion freedom (MDOF) systems, modal analysis. Continuous systems, axial
equation, 1-D steady state conduction in extended surfaces, heat vibration of rods, bending vibration of beams torsional vibration of
generation, lumped capacitance and 1D transient models, semi-infinite rods, Rayleigh-Ritz method, symmetric and antisymmetric modes.
wall. Heat transfer coefficients in natural and forced convection; Time domain and frequency domain analyses. Numerical methods-
Convection: Forced and free convection - mass, momentum and extraction of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, time integration
energy conservation equations, scaling analysis and significance techniques.
of non-dimensional numbers, thermal boundary layers, heat
transfer in external and internal laminar and turbulent flows and ApD310 Mini project
use of correlations. Heat exchanger types and analysis: LMTD and 3 Credits (0-0-6)
effectiveness-NTU method. Introduction to radiative heat transfer;
Pre-requisite(s): EC 50
Radiation: properties, Laws, view factor, 3-surface network for diffuse
- gray surfaces. Gas radiation.
ApL310 Constitutive Modeling
ApL300 Computational Mechanics 4 Credits (3-0-2)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): APL104/APL105/APL108 EC 50
Pre-requisite(s): APL104/APL105/APL106/APL107/APL108/
Mathematical Preliminaries (scalar, vector, tensor operation)
CHL231 Thermodynamics (thermodynamical framework for constitutive
Concept of continuum; introduction to stress, strain and rate of modeling), Kinematics of Deformation & Motion, Stree-strain
strain tensors; Principal stress and strains; Equation of equilibrium/ principles, Elasticity, Anisotropy, viscoelasticity, multi-physical
motion in solid and fluid mechanics; lagrangian and eulerian view coupling effect, plasticity, viscoplasticity. Experimental: Experimental
point; constitutive equations in the context of both solids and fluids; characterization, data analysis, Model fitting.
System of simultaneous linear and non-linear equations: how they
arise in mechanics; Determination of constitute curves; interpolation ApD311 project
techniques; Application of numerical integration and differentiation to
4 Credits (0-0-8)
axial vibration of bars and beams; solution techniques for boundary
value problems arising in bending of beams, one dimensional fluid Pre-requisite(s): EC 50, 12 Credits of Minor Area in Computational
flows and boundary layer equations; stability analysis – computation Mechanics
112

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Applied Mechanics
ApL311 Introduction to Finite Element Method Overlaps with: APL360, APL711, APL715, MCL702
4 Credits (3-0-2) Derivation of Navier-Stokes (NS) equations; Boundary-conditions and
Exact/Similarity solutions. General Boundary-Layer assumption; Free-
Pre-requisite(s): APL104
shear flows; Separation and drag crisis. Low Reynolds Number flows:
Overlaps with: APL705, APL706 Stokes Flow; Oseen’s Correction; Lubrication Theory. Hydrodynamic
Strong and weak forms of governing differential equations, and Stability Theory: Capillary Instability; Orr-Sommerfeld Equation;
their equivalence, weighted residual and variational approaches. Squire’s Theorem; Turbulence: Nature of turbulence; Averaging and
Ritz method. Discretization of weak form and boundary conditions. scales; Reynolds decomposition and the closure problem; Kolmogorov
Convergence. Bar and beam elements. Truss and frame problems, hypotheses and microscales; Reynolds stress; eddy viscosity vs.
Isoperimetric formulation. Plane strain, plane stress and axi-symmetric molecular viscosity. Dynamics of turbulence; balance of kinetic
problems, 3D elasticity problems, one and two dimensional heat energy, vorticity dynamics, scalar dispersion. Statistics; convergence
transfer. Formulation of dynamics problems. Laboratory work on solid of averages; correlations and probability density functions. Turbulent
mechanics and heat transfer problems. shear flows.
ApL380 Biomechanics
ApL321 Introduction to Computational Fluid Dynamics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 and EC 50
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 or equivalent, MTL107
Basics of rigid body mechanics, solid mechanics, and fluid mechanics
Overlaps with: APL720, CLL768, MCL813
applied in biological system; Basic introduction to anatomy and
Review of governing equations for fluid flow, finite difference and physiology; Mechanics of Human Motion; Mechanics of response
finite volume method and its application to steady 1-D, 2-D and 3-D of tissues including bones; Mechanics of Blood flow, Biosolid-
convection-diffusion problems, extension of FVM to unsteady 1-D, fluid interaction.
2-D and 3-D convection diffusion problems, solution of discretized
Computer Lab contents: Matlab Programming basics, Image
Navier Stokes equations and boundary conditions, physical
processing basics, Design of Joint: Rigid Body Mechanics based
description of turbulence, Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes
approach, Matlab programming for bone or Aortic Tissue; Matlab
equations, closure problem; RANS based turbulence models;
programming for blood flow analysis.
introduction to DNS and LES.
ApL390 Experimental Techniques in Fluids and Solids
ApL331 Advanced Mechanics of Solids
3.5 Credits (2-0-3)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL103
Pre-requisite(s): APL104/APL105/APL108 EC50
Review of errors in measurements and other statistical concepts
Mathematical Preliminaries (scalar, vector, tensor operation) related to errors and their combinations, and probability distributions.
Thermodynamics thermodynamically framework for constitutive Advanced techniques in fluid flow: Hot wire Anemometry, Laser
modeling), Kinematics of Deformation & Motion, Stress-strain Doppler Velocimetry and particle sizing, particle Image Velocimetry,
principles, Elasticity, Anisotropy, viscoelasticity, multi-physical Volumetric methods: Tomo PIV and background oriented Schlieren,
coupling effect, plasticity, viscoelasticity. Experimental: Experimental Derived Quantities from PIV: Vorticity, strain rate and pressure.
characterization, data analysis, Model fitting. Applications related to Strain gauges, Clip gauges, Piezoelectric
sensors, and Ultrasonic sensors. Coherent gradient sensing (CGS).
ApL340 Chaos 2D Digital image correlation (DIC) for full field measurements. Moire
fringe methods. Particle image velocimetry (PIV). Hardness testing of
4 Credits (3-1-0)
the common engineering materials. Characterization of solids under
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 and EC 50 compression, tension and shear. Fatigue and Creep testing. Drop
Introduction to linear systems and its classification, Fixed point tower. Modal analysis and structural vibrations. Sound absorption
and stability, linear stability analysis, Linearization of nonlinear characterization of the material.
systems, Types of bifurcation and examples, imperfect bifurcations
and catastrophes, Coupled oscillators and quasiperiodicity, Poincare ApL402 Fluid Structure Interaction
Maps, Introduction to Chaos, Lorenz equation, one-dimensional
3 Credits (3-0-0)
map, fractals.
Pre-requisite(s): APL104 or equivalent, APL106 or equivalent
ApL360 Engineering Fluid Flow Introduction, Flow separation, Vortex shedding, Basics of vibration,
4 Credits (3-0-2) Spring-mass system, Free and forced vibration, Dimensional analysis,
Coupled equations of fluid and structure, Dimensionless coupled
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 and EC 50
equation, Dimensionless numbers in FSI, Added mass. Vortex induced
Introduction to Cartesian tensors. vibrations, Wake oscillator model, Galloping, Vibration induced in
The Navier Stokes Equations: Derivation via continuum mechanics; pipes by external and internal axial flow, sloshing, Dynamics of
Boundary conditions; surface tension; Exact Solutions; Steady and continuous solid and fluid systems, Waves and vibrations in FSI, basics
unsteady problems; Similarity solutions. of acoustics. Computational techniques for FSI solvers: Monolithic vs
Laminar Boundary-Layers: Order of magnitude analysis; Blasius partitioned approach, One-way/explicit vs two-way/implicit coupling,
solution; Von Kármán Momentum Integral; Free-shear flows. accuracy, and stability criterion.
Low Reynolds Number flows: Stokes Flow; Oseen’s Correction.
ApL405 Machine Learning in Mechanics
Lubrication Approximation.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Hydrodynamic Stability Theory: Capillary Instability; Orr-Sommerfeld
Equation; Rayleigh Equation. Inflection Point Criterion. Rotating flows. Overlaps with: ELL784, COL341, COL774
Introduction to Turbulent Flows: Reynolds decomposition; Closure Introduction: Linear Algebra, Probability review, Programming
problem. Scaling arguments; energy cascade and vorticity dynamics. Basics, Challenges in Data Handling Regression: Simple Linear
Regression, Multiple Linear Regression, Nonlinear Regression, Logistic
ApL361 Advanced Fluid Dynamics regression Introduction to Machine learning: Supervised Learning,
Unsupervised Learning, Classification and Clustering Algorithms
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Applications of Machine Learning in Mechanics: Case Studies include
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 or equivalent Identifying faulty/healthy wind turbines, Turbulent Flow Analysis,
113

Applied Mechanics Courses of Study 2024-2025
Leakage Detection in Hydraulic Circuits, Fault Detection in Motor- and pipe flow), large eddy simulation, direct numerical simulations
Bearings, Human Activity Recognition, Heart Sound Classification and extraction of various statistics from raw CFD data.
etc. Deep learning: Introduction to Neural Networks, Convolution and
Artificial Neural Networks, Applications in Engineering Mechanics ApL422 Advanced Computational Fluid Mechanics
Practical’s: MATLAB tools including Curve Fitting Toolbox, Classification 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Learner App, Deep Network Designer App, Tensor Flow, Training
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 or equivalent, APL321
models on GPUs.
Overlaps with: APL720, CLL768, MCL813
ApL410 Multiscale Modeling and Computation
Introduction to numerical methods, mesh generation and mesh
3 Credits (3-0-0) adaptivity, spectral methods and applications to fluid simulations,
discrete and fast Fourier transforms, Chebyshev polynomials,
Pre-requisite(s): APL104 or equivalent course in Basic Solid
Gibbs phenomena, spectral discretization methods for diffusion
Mechanics
and convection-diffusion problems, staggered and collocated
Introduction to multiscale modeling; Bridging nano, micro and grids, pressure velocity coupling, predictor corrector method
macro scale in materials; Basic equations of continuum mechanics; multigrid method.
Micromechanical homogenization theory: Ergodicity principle,
representative volume element, periodic boundary conditions, ApL424 Introduction to Hydrodynamic Stability
eigenstrain, eigenstress, inclusions; Effective elastic modulus:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
self-consistent method, Mori-Tanaka method, Eshelby method,
Multi-inclusions problems; Voigt and Reuss bound; Hashin- Introduction, Mechanisms of instability, Kelvin-Helmholtz Instability,
shtrikmanvariational principles; Micromechanical damage theory; Inviscid Instability of Parallel Flows, Viscous Instability of Parallel
Micromechanics of phase transformation in solids; Nanomechanics: Flows, Free Surface Flows, Orr-Sommerfeld equation, Tollmien-
Linear atomic chains, two and three dimensional lattices, Molecular Schlitchting waves.
mechanics, Cauchy-Born rule.
ApL431 Aircraft Structures
ApL411 Application of Finite Elements (project 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Oriented)
Pre-requisite(s): APL100, APL104
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Introduction to elasticity and aerospace structures Loads on aerospace
Introduction to FEM, Types of elements, degrees of freedom, loads
structures, Beams, Truss and Frame Torsion of noncircular prismatic
and boundary conditions. Introduction to finite element software,
bars. Curved beams. Stability of structures. Theory of Thin-walled
Mesh refinement, convergence criterion, Stress analysis in a three-
beams, Open and closed cross-section, Torsion and bending of
dimensional body, Application to frames, beam and plate elements,
thin-walled beams. Normal stresses and shear flows, shear Centre,
Transient dynamic analysis, Stability of lightweight structures, Fracture
bending and torsional stability. Energy and variational based numerical
analysis, Application to smart structures.
methods.
ApL412 Computational to Multibody Dynamics
ApL432 Aeroelasticity
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL203
Pre-requisite(s): APL104, APL106
Overlaps with: MCL738
Introduction to aeroelasticity and aeroelastic phenomena, Static
Kinematics, Angular velocity, Frame, Composition of velocities, Euler and dynamic aeroelastic phenomena using simplified aerodynamic
Newton formulation of equations of motion. Energy based formulation and structural models, 1-Daeroelastic model of airfoil, Divergence
of Equations of motion (Hamiltonian and Lagrangian). Constraints of 2-D airfoil and straight wing, Wing loading and deformations,
equations (2D & 3D) and Actuators System level multibody equation Flutter model of 2-D airfoil, Unsteady aerodynamics, 2-D and 3-D
formulation for 2D examples. Numerical integration of the E.O.M. of supersonic flow, Subsonic flow, Theodorsen theory, Flutter calculation,
the system (2D). Orientation parameterization: Euler angles, Euler Exact treatment of bending – torsion, Flutter of uniform wing,
parameters, Quaternions etc. Examples of 3D rigid multibody systems. Flutter analysis by assumed mode method, Panel flutter, Numerical
Intro to flexible-multibody systems (governing equations etc). aeroelastic calculations using software.
ApL415 Composite Mechanics and Structures ApL433 Introduction to plates and Shells
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL311, APL331 Pre-requisite(s): APL104
Overlaps with: APL835 Overlaps with: APL831, CVL858
Composites, Various reinforcement and matrix materials, Strength Basic assumptions of two-dimensional (surface) theories Theory
and stiffness properties, Effective moduli, Spherical inclusions, Bio- of thin plates, bending of rectangular and circular plates, shear
composites, cylindrical and lamellar systems, Laminates: Laminated deformation theories. General theory of curved shells, Axi-symmetric
plates, Analysis and Design with composites, Fiber reinforced problems of cylindrical, conical and spherical shells and pressure
pressure vessels, dynamic, inelastic and non-linear effects, Fabrication vessels, membrane problems of cylindrical, spherical and conical
of composites, Machining of composites, Strength evaluation, shells. Energy methods, Design considerations.
Technological applications.
ApL434 Smart Materials and Structures
ApL421 Applications of CFD
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): APL104
Pre-requisites: APL 720
Review of basics of the Finite Volume Method (FVM): discretization Overlaps with: CVL864
schemes, time stepping, stability, types of grid, iterative solution Introduction to Smart Material Systems; Overview of smart materials,
methods. Structured and unstructured grid generation. Projects on Modeling mechanical, thermal and electrical systems (thermo
simulations of steady laminar flow (lid driven cavity and boundary mechanics and electrostatics);Piezoelectric materials: constitutive
layer flow), unsteady laminar flow (flow past a cylinder), turbulent modelling, piezoelectric beam static and vibration analysis Shape
flows (using Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations, channel flow memory alloys (SMA): constitutive modelling, actuation models for
114

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Applied Mechanics
SMA, electrical actuation Brief overview of Electroactive Polymers, AML701 Engineering Mathematics & Mechanics
Magnetostrictive materials, Electro and Magneto Rheological Fluids 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Mechanics of smart composite structures Transducer applications:
Partial differential equations. Fourier Series and transforms. Calculus
Vibration control and damping using piezoelectric materials. Case
of variations. Newtonian and Lagrangian mechanics. Variational and
study: Sensing and control of Smart beams and plates.
Hamiltonian mechanics.
ApL435 Impact Mechanics and Crash Worthiness ApL701 Continuum Mechanics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL311, APL331 Concept of continuum, kinematics of deformation, concept of stress
and strain tensor – their transformation and decomposition, finite
Rigid body impact, Stress waves in solids, Applications of one
strain tensor and its linearization with examples, rate of deformation
dimensional stress wave theory. Reflection at boundaries and
tensor – velocity gradient and spin tensor, derivation of conservation
interface, Waves in infinite and semi-infinite medium, Plasticity
laws – mass continuity, linear and angular momentum conservation,
and Plastic Waves, Shock waves and Equation of State, Material
derivation of linear equations of elasticity and Navier Stokes equations
Characterization and Impact Tests, Computational Methods for
in both cartesian and polar co-ordinates, principle of minimum
Impact, Applications to Ballistic Impact and Vehicle Collision.
potential energy, virtual work theorem, uniqueness and reciprocal
theorem, constitutive laws for linearly elastic solids and newtonian
ApL440 parallel processing in Computational Mechanics
viscous fluids, incompressible case, applications in solid and fluid
4 Credits (3-0-2) mechanics problems.
Pre-requisite(s): APL310
AML702 Applied Computational Methods
Introduction to multi-processor, multi-core, multi-threaded processing
4 Credits (3-0-2)
and their clusters, GPUs and CUDA programing, Introduction to
Algorithms. Methods of undetermined coefficients. Numerical
parallel processing hardware and software, Open MP, MPI, MPICH,
differentiation and integration. Solution of ordinary differential
HPC / Clustering tools and software suits.
equations. Solution of linear and non-linear algebraic equations.
Exploring parallelism in solid/fluid mechanics problems and
Boundary value problems and initial value problems. Numerical
formulation of numerical methods, Partitioning and divide-and-
solution of partial differential equations. Eigenvalue problems.
conquer strategies, Parallel algorithms for solving dynamical and
non-linear systems, Finite difference and Finite element analysis of ApL702 Experimental Methods for Solids and Fluids
plate and shells, Finite elements in fluids, Reduced integration patch 3 Credits (2-0-2)
test, Dynamic FE analysis, Geometrically nonlinear problems, Material
Types of Measurement and errors, Internal and external estimates
nonlinearity, Automated mesh generation, Pre and post processing,
of errors, Relative frequency distribution, Histogram, True Value,
Solid fluid interaction problems, Efficient solution technique-PCG,
Precision of measurement, Best estimate of true value and standard
Domain decomposition, Point source method, Boundary element
deviation, Combination of measurements, accuracy of the mean,
method, Aero elastic flutter, Other special topics.
significant digits. Methods of least squares and its application to
the calculation of best estimate of the true value, the curve
ApL450 Introduction to Soft Robotics
fitting, general linear regression, comparison and combination of
3 Credits (3-0-0) measurements. Extensions of least square method, Principle of
Pre-requisite(s): APL104 or equivalent maximum likelihood, and goodness of fit, chi-square test, Dynamic
response of a measuring instrument, Response to transient and
Soft robots vs Rigid robots, manufacturing techniques of multifunctional
periodic signals, first and second order systems as well as their
soft robot devices: Modeling soft mechanics (numerical, computational,
dynamics response characteristics.
analytical), Introduction to morphological simulation: Soft actuators
(Dielectric, pneumatic, fluidics): Soft sensors (Fluidic, solid,
ApL703 Engineering Mathematics and Computation
composites, textiles): Soft logic (controllers, semiconducting polymer,
thin film silicon):Soft energy (thermodynamics, soft batteries, soft 4 Credits (3-0-2)
combustion) Applications (wearable robotics, space robotics, deep- Tensors, Vector Calculus; Linear Algebra – Solution of Linear
sea robotics). Systems, Eigenvalue Problems; Variational calculus; Fourier Series
and transform, Analytical and Numerical Solution methods of ODEs,
Partial Differential Equations – properties and solution techniques,
ApL452 Introduction to Digital Twins
Probability and Statistics.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL107, APL203, COL100 AML704 Flow of Non-Newtonian Fluids and Complex
Mixture
Introduction to Digital Twins and establishing the need for
Computational Tools in modern engineering. First Principles Modelling 3 Credits (3-0-0)
using numerical solutions of ODEs and PDEs, Simulation of Dynamic Classification and properties of non-Newtonian Fluids, Rheological
systems in the Time-domain using Block-domain methods & Physical parameters and flow properties. Governing equations. Flow of non-
Modelling using Lagrangian Methods. Data-driven Modelling: Data Newtonian fluids through pipes. Turbulent Flows. Complex mixtures.
Handling, Filtering and pre-processing, Visualization and Classification, Phase separation and setting behavior. Fundamental concepts for flow
Fitting classification models to data. Case Study or Project. of mixtures. Flow of mixtures through pipes. Typical flow patterns.
ApL705 Finite Element Method
ApL491 Reliability Engineering
4 Credits (3-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Uncertainties in Engineering Systems, Bathtub analogy, RAM Concept, Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
Limit State/Performance function, Random variables, Probability Strong and weak forms of governing differential equations, and
concepts and statistical models, Joint probability distribution, their equivalence, Weighted residual and variational approaches.
Application of Boolean Algebra, Bayesian Theory, Logic gates, Baye’s Ritz method. Discretization of weak form and boundary conditions.
theorem, System reliability, Series and parallel system, System Convergence. Bar and beam elements. Truss and frame problems,
with standby units, Reliability assessment methods, Deterministic Isoparametric formulation. Plane strain, plane stress and axi-
and probabilistic approaches, Codal provisions, Probabilistic design symmetric problems, 3D elasticity problems, one and two dimensional
methodology, Stochastic finite element method, Applications, Case heat transfer. Formulation of dynamics problems. Laboratory work
studies in project mode. on solid mechanics and heat transfer problems.
115

Applied Mechanics Courses of Study 2024-2025
AML706 Finite Element Methods and its Applications momentum, energy and their applications. Inviscid flows. Flow
to Marine Structures through pipes and Reynolds number effects. Navier-stokes equations
and applications. Models of turbulence. Boundary layer flows. Thermal
3 Credits (3-0-0)
boundary layers. Boundary layers in power plant flows. Thermal
Introduction to FEM. Variational methods. Element types and
boundary layers. Boundary layers in power plant flows (case study).
properties. Boundary conditions. Stress-strain determination. Solution
Pipe networks. Turbulent flows in power plant flows (case study).
techniques. Mesh refinement. Convergence criterion. Frames, beams
Plane and axi-sysmmetric jets and wakes and their application in
and axial element. Plane stress. Plane strain. Axisymmetric problems.
power plants (case study). Compressible flows and applications in
Plate bending. Fluid mechanics and heat transfer. Super elements.
power plants (case study). Transportation of material by fluid flows.
Structural instability of frames and beams.
Types of complex mixtures. Two Phase flows. Phase separation and
setting behavior. Slurry pipeline transformation and applications in
ApL707 Integral Equations
power plants (case study). Review of numerical methods in fluid
3 Credits (3-0-0) flows. Basic principles of experimental analysis. Flow visualization
Overlaps with: MTL746 techniques. Flow metering and other fluid devices for measurement
of pressure, velocity, discharge, etc. and their applications in power
Hadamard’s inequality, Hilbert spaces, existence theorems, Volterra
plants (case study).
equations, Fredholm equations, application to partial differential
equations, integral transforms – Fourier, Laplace, Hankel & Mellin,
AML715 Viscous Fluid Flow
Wiener-Hopf method/equations, singular integral equations of the
Cauchy type, numerical techniques for singular integral equations, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
application to elasticity problems. Governing equations in differential form. Navier-Stokes equations
and applications. Review of boundary layer prediction methods.
ApL710 Computer Aided Design Transition and turbulence. Turbulent boundary layers. Drag on
4 Credits (3-0-2) bodies. Free turbulent flows. Turbulent boundary layer prediction methods.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 ApL715 physics of Turbulent Flows
Principles of computer aided design, Computer graphics fundamentals,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
2D and 3D Transformations and projections, Plane Curves, Space
Introduction, nature of turbulence, methods of analysis, scales of
Curves, Synthetic curves. Analytical and parametric surfaces, Synthetic
turbulent flows. Reynolds decomposition and the closure problem,
surfaces, Solid Modeling basics, Solid modeling techniques and
estimates of the Reynolds stress, comparison with the kinetic theory
schemes, Half-spaces, Boundary Representation (B-rep), Constructive
of gases. Dynamics of turbulence, balance of kinetic energy, vorticity
Solid Geometry (CSG), Sweep Modeling, Analytical Solid Modeling,
dynamics, scalar fluctuations. Free shear flows: jets, wakes and mixing
Visual Realism, hidden lines and surface.
layers. Wall bounded flows: channel and pipe flows, boundary layers.
Kolmogorov hypotheses; probability density function, characteristic
ApV710 Similitude and Approximations in Engineering
function and moments; structure and correlation functions; energy
1 Credit (1-0-0) spectra, intermittency. Turbulent transport and dissipation.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
ApL716 Fluid Transportation Systems
Introduction to the concept of natural units; dimensional analysis;
method of scale factors; non-dimensionalization of governing 3 Credits (3-0-0)
equations and boundary conditions; self-similarity; relaxation of Mechanism of transportation of materials by fluid flow, rheology and
modelling requirements; introduction to the theory of approximations; classification of complex mixtures, fundamentals of two-phase flow,
singular approximations and boundary layers; case studies from Phase separation and settling behavior, Slurry Pipeline Transportation,
diverse fields. Design methods, terminal facilities, pipe protection, pneumatic
conveying, pneumocapsule and hydrocapsule pipelines, metrology
ApL711 Advanced Fluid Mechanics associated with pipelines.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ApL720 Computational Fluid Dynamics
Mathematical Preliminaries, Kinematics, Navier Stokes equations and
some standard solutions, Low Reynolds number flows and Lubrication, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Vorticity dynamics, Introduction to boundary layers, Hydrodynamic
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
stability, 1-D compressible flows.
Review of governing equations for fluid flow, finite volume method
and its application to steady 1-D, 2-D and 3-D convection-diffusion
AML713 Applied Fluid Mechanics
problems, extension of FVM to unsteady 1-D, 2-D and 3-D convection
4 Credits (3-1-0) diffusion problems, pressure-velocity coupling, staggered and
Basic equations of fluid motion, Dynamics of ideal fluid motion, colocated grids, solution of discretized equations, physical description
Generalised Bernoulli equation and special cases, Governing of turbulence, Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations, closure
equations for viscous fluid flows, creeping fluid flows, Boundary layer problem; RANS based turbulence models; DNS and LES.
approximation, Transition to turbulence, Fundamentals of turbulent
flow, turbulent boundary layer over a flat plate. AML731 Applied Elasticity
4 Credits (3-1-0)
ApL713 Turbulence and its Modeling
Cartesian tensors, axioms, motion, stress, equations of motion,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Poil, Kirchoff stress, finite strain measures, strain energy, small
Nature of turbulence, Governing equations, Fourier, Lagrnagian strains, linear elastic constitutive equations. Basic problems. General
and Eulerian description of turbulence, Statistical description theorems of uniqueness. Superposition and reciprocity. St. Venant’s
of turbulence, Kolmogorov’s hypotheses, turbulence processes, problem. Plane problems. Principle of virtual work. Potential energy.
turbulence closure modelling. Complementary energy. Reissner’s variational principles. Approximate
analytical and numerical methods of solution.
AML714 Fluid Flow Analysis and Application to power
plants AML732 Solid Mechanics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to flow types, fluid statics, relative equilibrium and Elementary theory of elasticity and plasticity. Theory of plates.
Kinematics. Fluid flow equations for mass, momentum, angular Instability of rectangular plates. Stiffened plates. Anisotropic plates.
116

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Applied Mechanics
AML733 Dynamics Probing Cell & Tissue Mechanical Properties. Intro to Indentation,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Aspiration, twezeer, Nanopatterened platform based techniques etc.
Single degree freedom system. Multidegree freedom system. Numerical ApL744 probabilistic Machine Learning for Mechanics
methods. Holzer-type problem geared and branched systems. Euler’s
4 Credits (3-0-2)
equation for beams. Torsional vibrations. Continuous systems.
Lagrange’s equations. Balancing of shaft. Self excited vibration. Pre-requisite(s): APL703 / APL101 / MTL106 / MTL108 or
equivalent
ApL734 Advanced Dynamics
Review of Probability and statistics, Different probability distributions,
3 Credits (3-0-0) prior, posterior, and likelihood, Maximum likelihood estimation,
Single Degrees of Freedom systems, Multi-degree of freedom systems, MAP estimate, Prior modelling, Hierarchical prior, empirical Bayes
Response spectrum, Time integration schemes, Lagrange’s equations, and evidence approximation, Sampling methods (Accept-reject
Principle of virtual work, continuous system. sampling, importance sampling, Gibbs sampling, Markov chain and
MH algorithm, sequential importance sampling, SMC and particle filter.
ApL736 Multiscale Modeling of Crystalline Materials
Bayesian linear regression, Probabilistic PCA, Relevance vector
4 Credits (3-0-2) machine, Gaussian process, variational inference.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 Application in mechanics: Feature extraction, constitutive modeling,
Review of continuum mechanics, material symmetry, thermodynamics reliability analysis and uncertainty quantification, system identification,
and constitutive relations, symmetry in crystals, empirical and parameter estimation, and force estimation.
semi-empirical models of inter-atomic potential, molecular statics
ApL745 Deep Learning for Mechanics
and dynamics, finite temperature effects in molecular systems,
probabilistic behavior of material characteristics at macro scale, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
multiscale methods - Cauchy-Born rule and Quasi-continuum method, Plied math and machine learning basics, deep feedforward network,
Mechanics of helical nanostructures (e.g., carbon nanotubes, DNA, regularization for deep learning, optimization for training deep
polymers), Bending and twisting of nanotubes and nanorods. learning, convolutional network, recurrent neural network.
Computer Lab contents: Programming molecular statics and molecular Physics informed deep learning in computational mechanics, residual
dynamics, molecular statics via conjugate gradient minimization and based approach, energy approach, time-discretization in physics
Newton-Raphson method, Monte Carlo simulation, Implementation informed deep learning, deep learning for inverse problems in
of Cauchy-Born rule and Quasi-continuum method, Exposure to mechanics, physics informed deep learning for stochastic dynamic/
LAMMPS and AMBER. mechanics problems.
Application in mechanics (Practical Component): Data-driven deep
ApL737 Advanced Design of Machine Elements
learning for stochastic mechanics. Data-driven deep learning for
3 Credits (3-0-0) solving inverse problems, Physics informed deep learning for fracture
Overview of static failure theories in terms of failure surface. mechanics, Physics informed deep learning for reliability analysis,
Fracture Mechanics (stress intensity as a design criterion). Fatigue Physics informed deep learning for ID phase-field equation, learning
Failure (emulative damage. Strain-life method). Contact mechanic parameters of Navier stokes equation and constitutive relations using
(rough surface contacts, thermo-elastic contact). Surface Failure physics informed deep learning.
(hydrodynamic lubrication. Wear mechanics). Creep (Three / Five-
ApL746 Environmental Fluid Dynamics
Power Law. Life estimation. Statistical Failure (ANOVA reliability theory).
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ApL740 Mechanics of Biological Cells
Pre-requisite(s): APLI05 / APL106 / APL107 / CLL231 or
4 Credits (3-0-2)
equivalent
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
Overlaps with: ASL734, ASL823, ASL737
Theoretical Part: Basic Introduction to mechano-biology, Concept of
Course contents: Basic equations of motion in a rotating reference
Length Scale, Mechanical Forces, Mass, Stiffness and Damping of
frame, stratification, Boussinesq and hydrostatic approximations,
Proteins, Thermal Forces and Diffusion, Chemical Forces, Polymer
vorticity equation, geostrophic balance, thermal wind balance,
Mechanics. Intracellular Mechanics: Structures of Cytoskeleton
Shallow-water equations, Surface and internal gravity waves, Kelvin-
Filaments, Dynamics of Cell Filaments, Molecular motors, Introduction
Helmholtz instability, thermal instability, barotropic and baroclinic
to Entropic Elasticity and Persistence Length, Force Generation by
instability, gravity currents, thermals and plumes, natural ventilation.
Cytoskeleton Filaments. Extracellular Mechanics: The Extracellular
matrix (ECM), Cell-ECM Interactions, Cell Migration, Forces and
APL747 Uncertainty Quantification and Propagation
Adhesion. Tissue Mechanics: Cell-cell Assemblies, Tissue Material
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Behavior, Introduction to Linear Viscoelasticity, Concept of Constitutive
Modeling. Experimental Part: Different Experimental Methods for Pre-requisite(s): For UG: APL101/MTL 106/MTL 108 or
Probing Cell Mechanical Properties. Intro to indentation, Aspiration, equivalent and EC 75 For PG: NO Pre-requisites required.
Twezeer, Nano patterened platform based techniques etc.
Need for UQ in computational mechanics, types of uncertainty and
ApL 742 Advanced Biomechanics errors, review of fundamentals of probability, random processes and
statistics, representation of random inputs, frequentist and Bayesian
4 Credits (3-0-2)
parameter identification techniques, uncertainty propagation in model-
Basic Introduction to biomechanics of tissue/cells,Concept of Length form uncertainty, surrogate models for uncertainty quantification and
Scale, Mechanical Forces, Mass, Stiffness and Damping of Proteins, propagation, sensitivity analysis.
Thermal Forces and Diffusion, Chemical Forces, Polymer Mechanics.
Tissue Mechanics: Cell-cell Assemblies,Tissue Material Behavior, AML751 Materials for Marine Vehicles
Introduction to Linear Viscoelasticity, Concept of Constitutive 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Modeling, Nonlinear continuum frame work of biomechancial
Corrosion, Selection of materials, Brittle fracture techniques,
simulation, special topic on tissue-device interaction, orthopedic/
Introduction of fracture mechanics, Fatigue, Non-destructive testing.
spinal implants etc. Intracellular Mechanics: Structures of Cytoskeleton
Filaments, Dynamics of Cell Filaments, Molecular motors, Introduction ApL753 properties and Selection of Engineering Materials
to Entropic Elasticity and Persistence Length, Force Generation by 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Cytoskeleton Filaments. Extracellular Mechanics: The Extracellular
matrix (ECM), cell-ECM Interactions, Cell Migration, Forces and Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
Adhesion. Experimental Part Different Experimental Methods for Historical evolution of engineering materials, evolution of materials
117

Applied Mechanics Courses of Study 2024-2025
in products, Engineering materials and their properties: families of ApL775 Design Methods
engineering materials, materials information for design, materials 3 Credits (3-0-0)
properties, Materials property chart: exploring materials properties,
Introduction, design cycle, need analysis, product specifications,
materials property charts e.g. the modulus-density chart, the
quality function deployment (QFD), concept generation, concept
strength-density chart, the fracture toughness-modulus chart, thermal
selection, TRIZ, concept testing, preliminary design, architecture
conductivity-electrical resistivity chart, Materials selection-the basics:
design. Modeling, sensitivity, compatibility, stability analyses. Design
the selection strategy, materials indices, the selection procedure,
for manufacturing, material, maintenance and safety. Industrial
Multiple constraints and conflicting objectives: selection with multiple
design, detailed design, prototype/model testing. Axiomatic design.
constraints, conflicting objectives, Selection of materials and shape:
Detailed Drawings/Assembly Drawings/Assembly Instructions/
shape factors, limits to shape efficiency, exploring the materials shape
Maintenance Manuals, Case Studies.
combinations, materials indices that include shape, architectured
materials, Processes and process selection: classification of processes: ApL776 product Design and Feasibility Study (Stream Core)
shaping, joining and finishing, processing for properties, process
4 Credits (2-0-4)
selection, ranking process cost, Designing hybrid materials: holes in
Prefeasibility Study, Market Analysis-Development of Sales Plan.
materials property space, composites, sandwich structures, cellular
Technical Analysis- Development of Manufacturing Plan. Financial
structures, segmented structures, case studies.
Analysis-Develop General and Administrative Plan, Evaluate Project
ApL764 Biomaterials Feasibility, Preparation of project Proposal. Human Factors in Design,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Human factors and systems, Information input, Human output
and control, Workplace Design, environmental conditions, human
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
factors applications.
Introduction and history of biomaterials; Basic classes of engineering
materials and structure property correlation; Structure and property AMp777 product Design project-II
of cells and tissues; Property requirement of biomaterials including 2 Credits (0-0-4)
biocompatibility, and biobegrability; Basic types of biomaterials;
The above two course would be run in successive semesters. The
Mechanical testing of biomaterials; application of biomaterials
combined project work would comprise the following: Application of
(orthopedic, cardiovascular, dental) including detailed case
systematic design procedure for the design of a chosen industrial
study, Materials for biomedical devices and packaging (electronic
product. Students are expected to carry out all the three phases of
interfacing etc.)
the design cycle including fabrication and testing. Lectures will deal
ApL765 Fracture Mechanics with ergonomical factors in product design.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ApL787 Fatigue Failure and Design
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fracture: an overview, theoretical cohesive strength, defect population
Pre-requisite(s): APL 104/APL 105/APL 108 and 75 credits for
in solids, stress concentration factor, notch strengthening, elements
UG students
of fracture mechanics, Grifiths crack theory, stress analysis of crack,
energy and stress field approaches, plane strain and plane stress Course Contents: Historical overview; Fatigue design philosophies;
fracture toughness testing, crack opening displacement, elastic- Stress-life approach: SN diagram, mean stress effects, notches;
plastic analysis, J-integral, ductile-brittle transition, impact energy Strain-life approach: hysteresis loop, Bauschinger effect, shakedown,
fracture toughness correlation, microstructural aspects of fracture ratcheting, energy methods, Neuber's rule; Damage-tolerance
toughness, environmental assisted cracking, cyclic stress and strain approach: introduction to fracture, crack tip plasticity, fracture
fatigue, fatigue crack propagation, analysis of engineering failures. toughness, crack growth stages, crack closure, small fatigue cracks;
Physics of fatigue: imperfections in crystalline solids, slip bands,
ApL767 Engineering Failure Analysis and prevention
intrusions/extrusions, crack initiation, microstructure effects; Residual
3 Credits (3-0-0) stresses: origin, measurement methods, relationship with fatigue;
Fatigue under variable amplitude loading: load spectrums, linear and
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
nonlinear cumulative damage models, load interaction and sequence
Common causes of failure, principles of failure analysis, fracture
effects, rainflow method, life estimation; Multiaxial fatigue: multiaxial
mechanics approach to failure problems, techniques of failure analysis,
stress state, proportional and nonproportional loading, yielding and
service failure mechanisms, ductile and brittle fracture, fatigue failure,
plasticity in multiaxial fatigue, stress-based criteria (Sines method),
wear failure, hydrogen induced failure, environment induced failures,
strain- and energy-based approaches, critical plane approach
high temperature failure, faulty heat treatment and design failures,
(Fatemi-Socie model); Environmental effects: corrosion, fretting,
processing failure (forging, casting, machining etc.), failure problems
thermomechanical damage ( creep and creep-fatigue interactions),
in joints and weldments, case studies for failure analysis of structural
neutron irradiation; Statistical aspects of fatigue: regression analysis
components and mechanical system.
of fatigue data, fatigue scatter lognormal and Weibull distributions,
ApL771 Design Optimization and Decision Theory tolerance limits, reliability analysis.
3 Credits (3-0-0) AMp777 product Design project-II
Introduction, classification of optimization problems, single variable
2 Credits (0-0-4)
and multi variable unconstrained optimization problems, constrained
The above two course would be run in successive semesters. The
optimization, integer programming, genetic algorithms and simulated
combined project work would comprise the following: Application of
annealing, review of probability theory, decision theory.
systematic design procedure for the design of a chosen industrial
ApL774 Modeling & Analysis of Mechanical Systems product. Students are expected to carry out all the three phases of
3 Credits (3-0-0) the design cycle including fabrication and testing. Lectures will deal
with ergonomical factors in product design.
Introduction, constitutive modeling of elastic orthotropic, elasto-
plastic isotropic, and viscoelastic isotropic solids. Plane stress
AML791 Ship Resistance & propulsion
problems in polar coordinate system, bending of rectangular plates-
Navier and Levy’s solution, bending of circular plates, membrane 3 Credits (3-0-0)
theory of shells, bending of cylindrical shells, vibration and buckling Similarity consideration and Model testing, wave making resistance,
of rectangular plates. Flow measurement, velocity measurement, Viscous resistance, Estimation of Ship resistance, Appendage
multi-hole probes and optical measurements. External flows, boundary resistance, Presentation of resistance data and use of methodical
layers (laminar and turbulent); estimation of lift and drag, internal series, resistance of high speed and advanced marine vehicles. Hull
flows, application to pipe lines. propeller interaction, Cavitation, Wave-wake interference, thrust
118

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Applied Mechanics
computations, Scale effect, propeller design, Various propulsion AMS802 Independent Study
devices, Ship standardization trials. 3 Credits (0-3-0)
AML792 Structural Design of Ships
ApL805 Advanced Finite Element Method
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction, Ship as beam, long term loading of ship structure, periodic
Pre-requisite(s): APL705
wave loading, longitudinal response & dynamic behaviour, Criteria of
failure, Analysis of plates and grillages, Buckling of plates and panels, Variational calculus; Weak formulation of governing equations and its
Recent advances in load definition, transverse strength, torsional linearization; discretization of nonlinear weak form and its solution;
strength, bulkhead design, design of special structures, structural convergence requirement of shape functions; systematic generation of
design of unconventional crafts like hydrofoils, hovercrafts, SES, higher order elements; mixed FEM/penalty method; non-uniform and
SWATH, Catamarans, trimarans etc., design of submarine structures, adaptive discretization – p and H convergence; solid-fluid interaction
pressure hull, design of cylindrical shells, cones, bulkheads etc., problems; Generalized and extended finite element methods.
Applications of computers to ship structures and structural optimization.
ApV 808 planar Contact Mechanics
AML793 Ship Dynamics 1 Credit (1-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) AML731 or APL796 or an equivalent course in Linear Elasticity
Dynamics of oceans. Wave characteristics. Probabilistic theory of
Plane Contacts: Surface traction, interior stress fields, partial slip
waves. Ship motions. Sea loads and bending moments. Limiting criteria
rough contacts, numerical techniques.
stability and control of ships. Stabilization systems. Tests and trials.
ApD811 Major project part-I
AML794 Warship Design
6 Credits (0-0-12)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Salient features of warships, merchantships, naval auxiliaries and yard- AML811 Advanced Computational Fluid Dynamics
craft Principles and morphology of engineering design. Design spiral
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Feasibility studies. Preliminary design. Detailed design Warship design
Transport equation in rotating reference frame, finite volume methods
and production procedures. Staff requirements. Design activities.
including higher order upwinding, grid generation, Galerkin & upwind
Drawing and specifications. Ship production Tests and trials. General
finite element methods, considerations in discretization of turbulence
arrangement drawings—Weapon layout. Mass and space analysis.
models, rotating reference frame, hybrid methods gridless methods,
Stability aspects, Resistance, propulsion. Seakeeping and manoeuvering
multigrid method, special topics chosen from phase change problem,
considerations in design. Structural considerations. Survivability Cost
two-phase flow, compressible flow and numerical simulation.
aspects. Special types of hull forms. Computer aided ship design.
ApD812 Major project part-II
AML795 Submarine Design
12 Credits (0-0-24)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Flotation and trim. Hydrostatics. Survivability. Surface unsinkability. AMD813 Major project part-I
Stability. Design of pressure proof structures. Design of school mounts
6 Credits (0-0-12)
of equipments. Resistance. Methods of drag reduction. Selection
propulsion system. Endurance and indiscretion rates. Sea motions. AMD814 Major project part-II
Manoeuverability in vertical and horizontal planes and control surface
12 Credits (0-0-24)
design. Habitability. Ergonomics. Stealth systems. Submarine design
procedures. System approach of submarine design and military
ApL815 Hydrodynamic Stability
economic analysis. Use of computers in submarine design. Outer
3 Credits (3-0-0)
hull lines development. Simulation of submarine in vertical plane.
Introduction, Kelvin-Helmholtz instability, Rayleigh-Benard
ApL796 Advanced Solid Mechanics Convection, Inviscid instability of Parallel Flows, Viscous Instability
3 Credits (3-0-0) of Parallel Flows, Free Surface Flows, Weak-Nonlinear Instability,
Large deformation kinematics, lagrangian stress and strain tensors, Absolute and Convective Instability.
balance laws in lagrangian framework, nonlinear constitutive
AML816 Compressible Fluid Flow and Gas Dynamics
modeling, nonlinear theory of beams and buckling, wave propagation,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
theory of plasticity, solution of elasticity problems – contact modeling,
multiscale modeling etc. Review of one-dimensional flows. Two-dimensional flows. Shocks and
interactions. Small perturbation theory. Method of characteristics.
ApV779 Systems Engineering Stock-boundary layer interaction. Viscous effects. Introduction to
1 Credit (1-0-0) flows with chemical reactions. Dynamics of radiating gases.
Hypersonic flows.
Systems Engineering Process, NPD (New Product Development),
Complex Engineered Product, Devel-opment Project & Development
AML820 Advances in Fluid Engineering
Program, Establishing Top Level Requirements and Expectations,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Verifi-cation of Defined Requirements and their Traceability, Metadata
Set of Requirements, ConOps (Concept of Operations), Technical A course on any advanced topic in the area of Fluid Engineering may
Performance), Measures (TPM) – MOE (Measure of Effectiveness) be floated under this number.
and MOP (Measure of Performance), Development of Design (Concept
AML821 Flow Induced Vibrations
Exploration, Concept Design, Preliminary Design, Functional Design
& Detailed Design), Product Breakdown Structure (PBS), Work 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Breakdown Structure (WBS), Interface definition Document (IDD), General governing equations for solid-fluid interaction problems.
Testing Evaluation Master Plan (TEMP), System Engineering Master Decoupling approximations. Acoustically applied forces. Steady-
Plan (SEMP), Risk Management, Design management, Acceptance state scatter, transient scatter and transient shock response.
Management, Role of Systems Engineering, Soft skills of a Systems Hydrodynamically applied forces Flow induced noise, dynamic
Engineering, Case Studies of Design Disasters. divergence of compliant surfaces, flutter, stability of boundary layer
on compliant surfaces, propeller induced forces. Aeroelastic flutter
AMS801 Independent Study of plates, linear and non-linear response. Flow induced vibrations of
3 Credits (0-3-0) pipes and tube arrays etc.
119

Applied Mechanics Courses of Study 2024-2025
ApL821 Spectral Methods for Fluid Flow Computations AML838 Non-linear Mechanics
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL100/MTL101/APL703 or equivalent Singular points of non-linear systems. Phase plane and limit cycles.
Non-linear conservative systems. Variational techniques for solving
Spectral methods and application to fluid simulations, Sturm Liouville
autonomous, resonant and non-resonant systems and asymptotic
problems, polynomial approximations, discrete and fast Fourier
methods. Application to beams, plates and shells.
transforms, Chebyshev polynomials, Gibbs phenomena, spectral
discretization methods for diffusion and convection diffusion problems, AML840 Advances in Solid Mechanics
stability and convergence properties, pseudo spectral methods,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
steady and unsteady Burgers equation, applications in turbulence
simulations. An advanced course on any specialized topic in the area of Solid
Mechanics may be given under this number. The course content will
be announced by the teacher.
ApL831 Theory of plates and Shells
3 Credits (3-0-0) AML841 Advanced Theory of Elasticity
Basic assumptions of two-dimensional theories, Theory of surfaces, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Strain-displacement relations in shell coordinates, Stress-resultants, Two-dimensional problems in elasticity using complex variable
General governing equations of motion, Boundary conditions. techniques and conformal mapping. Three-dimensional problems.
Analytical solutions for bending and vibration of rectangular plates General representation theorems. Stability theory. Dynamics elasticity.
and circular plates. Approximate solution techniques. Membrane Theory of rods.
theory and its applicability, Membrane and general bending solutions
cylindrical, conical and spherical shells, and pressure vessels. Selected ApL871 product Reliability and Maintenance
problems on the stability. Design considerations. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Reliability; basic concepts, Uncertainty in engineering systems;
AML832 Applications of Theory of plates and Shells Modeling, Multiple random variables, product failure theories, Failure
2 Credits (2-0-0) models, Limit state function, Probability distribution, PDF & CDF,
Introduction. Recapitulation of classical plate theory. Orthotropic plate Evaluation of joint probability distribution, Markov Process, Stochastic
bending. Simplified 4th order theory. Panels and grillages. Navier’s Finite Element Analysis, Randomness in response variables, First
and Levy’s solutions. Stability. Bending of circular cylindrical shells. and higher order methods for reliability assessment, Deterministic
Stability of semi-infinite and finite cylinders. Donnel equations. Shells & probabilistic approach, Risk based design, Maintainability, Central
of revolution. Applications. limit theorem, load and resistance approach, Fault tree approach,
system reliability, stress strength interference method, Monte-Carlo
AML833 Applied plasticity and other simulation techniques, Regression analysis, Software based
reliability analysis, Sensitivity analysis and reliability based design
3 Credits (3-0-0)
optimization, international standards, Applications & case studies.
Fundamentals of plasticity theory. Solution of elastoplastic problems.
Theory and application of slip-line field. Bound theorems. Plastic AML872 Optimization Techniques
anisotropy. Large deformations. Dynamic plasticity. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Classical optimization techniques for unconstrained optimization.
AML834 Structural Stability Kutur Tucker conditions. Sensitivity analysis for linear programming
3 Credits (3-0-0) problems. Non-linear programming. Penalty function methods.
Types of instability, static, dynamic and energy criterion of buckling. Sequential linear programming. Feasible direction methods. Quadratic
Imperfection sensitive structures. Applications to columns, beams, programming. Geometric programming. Integer programming.
plates and shells. Follower forces, non-conservative loads. Application in engineering design.
AML873 Design for production
ApL835 Mechanics of Composite Materials
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Basic concepts and goals of design for production. Processes,
Composites, Various reinforcement and matrix materials, Strength
machines and tools for the manufacture of parts made from metals,
and stiffness properties, Effective moduli, Spherical inclusions, Bio-
ceramics and polymers. Significance of form in case of manufacture.
composites, cylindrical and lamellar systems, Laminates: Laminated
Attainable tolerances. Industrial finishes like painting, polishing,
plates, Analysis and Design with composites, Fiber reinforced
anodising nickel and chrome painting, surface texturizing. Value
pressure vessels, dynamic, inelastic and non-linear effects, Fabrication
analysis. Group technology. Assembly strategies. Design for quality.
of composites, Machining of composites, Strength evaluation,
Technological applications. ApL8M4 Critical product Evaluation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
AML836 Non-linear Vibration and Chaos
Value analysis. Quality standards in electronic, optical, mechanical
3 Credits (3-0-0) and other products. Critically examining product literatures,
Pre-requisite: AML701/AML734/CEL719/MEL733 raising questions, filling gaps in information and discovering
hidden details from product literature. Indentifying areas of design
Non-linear system. Analytical and graphical solutions. Solution stability
action by identifying limitations in existing products and gaps in
and bifurcation. Fourier transforms. Poincare section. Temporal
market segment. Examining and existing product for appreciation
chaos in dissipative systems. Simple and strange attractors. Fractal
and detailing.
dimension and geometric characterization. Hopf bifurcation and limit
cycle. Sub-harmonic instability and periodic doubling. ApD895 MS Research project
36 Credits (0-0-72)
AML837 Structural Mechanics
3 Credits (3-0-0) AMD897 Minor project
Matrix analysis of structures. Displacement methods. Substructuring 3 Credits (0-0-6)
grillages. Finite element methods for a structural continuum. Element
behaviour. Element families. Computational aspects of finite element AMD899 Design project
methods. 10 Credits (0-0-20)
120

Department of Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology
BBL131 principles of Biochemistry CSTR, CSTR with recycle, multistage CSTRs, and PFR; aeration and
4.5 Credits (3-0-3) agitation; rheology of fermentation fluids; mixing and scale-up;
air sterilization; media sterilization; design of fermentation media;
Introduction-aims and Scope; Non-covalent interactions in biological
aseptic transfer.
systems, Carbohydrates-structure and function; Proteins-structure
and function; Nucleic acids-structure and function Protein purification
BBp332 Bioprocess Engineering Laboratory
techniques; Introduction to enzymes; Vitamins and coenzymes;
Lipids and biological membranes; Transport across cell membrane; 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Design of metabolism; Metabolic pathways for breakdown of Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132
carbohydrates-glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, citric acid
Laboratory: Design and execution of simple laboratory scale
cycle, electron transport chain, Photo-phosphorylation; Oxidation of
experiments on the following topics: Estimation of cell mass; different
fatty acids; Gluconeogenesis and control of glycogen metabolism,
phases of microbial growth; Mass and energy balance in a typical
Signal transduction.
bioconversion process; Concept of limiting nutrient and its effect on
Laboratory: Estimation of proteins and nucleic acids; Extraction cell growth; growth inhibition kinetics; product formation kinetics in a
of lipids; Separation of lipids using thin layer chromatography, Gel fermentation process; aerobic and anaerobic bioconversion process;
filtration and ion exchange chromatography; Gel electrophoresis, power consumption in a fermentation process and its correlation with
Determination of enzymatic activities and determination of Km, Vmax. rheology of the fermentation fluid; different agitator types; mixing
Identification of intermediates of EMP pathway. time in a bioreactor; quantification of KLa in a fermentation process;
Heat balance across a batch sterilization process; Assembly and
BBL132 General Microbiology characterization of pH/DO electrodes.
4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
BBL341 Environmental Biotechnology
The topics include introduction to prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell
3 Credits (3-0-0)
structure; different groups of microorganisms; microbial nutrition
and growth; metabolism including important pathways; reproduction Pre-requisite(s): CVL100 and EC 80
and recombination; preservation and control of microbial cultures; Principles and concepts of ecosystem; Energy transfer in an
viruses; microbial pathogenicity. ecosystem; Nutrient cycling; Basics of Environmental Microbiology,
Laboratory: Preparation and sterilisation of culture media, isolation Environmental health: Ecotoxicology – Heavy metals, pesticides
of bacteria, Staining, Biochemical tests for identification of and their effects, Indices of toxicity, Measurement of pollution
microorganisms, Antibiotic sensitivity, Bacterial growth curve, effect (techniques and instrumentation), Dose–response relationship.
of environmental factors on bacterial growth, microbial diversity in Microbial biosensors in environmental monitoring, Environmental
environmental samples. technologies: Microorganisms and renewable sources of energy,
Biodegradation and bioremediation (phyto and microbial), Energy
BBL133 Mass and Energy Balances in Biochemical and nutrient recovery during waste treatment, Risk assessment: Life
cycle analysis, Molecular tools in Environmental Biotechnology, Role
Engineering
of biotechnology in environmental protection.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: CLL111 BBL342 physical and Chemical properties of
Stoichiometric relations and yield concepts, Maintenance coefficient, Biomolecules
Mass balance based on available electron concept; Units and 3 Credits (2-1-0)
dimensions, Fundamentals of material balance, Balance on unit
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131
processes and reactive systems, Behaviour of ideal and real gases,
vapour pressure, humidity and saturation. Energy balance, Heat Characteristic features of Biological system, Structure-function
capacity of gases, liquid and solids, Latent heat, Heat of reaction, relationships. Characterization of biomolecules by molecular shape,
formation and combustion, solution and dilution. Energy balance of size and molecular weight. Properties of biomolecules in solution:
reactive and non-reactive processes. Unsteady state material and Diffusion, ultra-centrifugation and electrophoresis. Optical properties
energy balance in bioprocess. Case studies. of biomolecules; Spectroscopic methods: IR, NMR, Optical rotary
and circular dichroism & imaging methods: Bright, darkfiled and
fluorescence imaging.
BBL231 Molecular Biology and Genetics
4.5 Credits (3-0-3) BBL343 Carbohydrates and Lipids in Biotechnology
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132 3 Credits (2-1-0)
Historical development and essentials of Mendelian genetics. Pre-requisite(s): BBL131 and EC 60
Chromosomal theory of inheritance. Evolution and development of
Introduction, Molecular structure of polysaccharides, Enzymes
molecular biology. DNA model and classes. Organization of eukaryotic
degrading polysaccharides, Physical properties of polysaccharides,
chromosome – the chromatin structure. Gene structure and Genome.
Production of microbial Polysaccharides, Food usage of
Transposon. Genetic Information and its perpetuation – DNA
exopolysaccharides, Industrial Usage of exopolysaccharides,
replication, damage and repair. Telomere and Aging. Transcription,
Medical applications of exopolysaccharides Molecular structure of
translation. Molecular biology of bacteriophage lamda. Gene exchange
lipids, Physical properties of lipids, Oleaginous microorganisms and
in bacteria. Gene regulation in prokaryotes. The operon model – lac,
their principal lipids, Production of microbial lipids, Modification of
ara, trp operons and gene regulation. Gene Regulation in Eukaryotes.
lipids for commercial applications, Extracellular microbial lipids and
DNA Methylation and Genomic Imprinting.
biosurfactants, Micelles and reverse micelles in biology, Liposomes
Laboratory: Isolation of genomic and plasmid DNA, Agarose Gel in drug delivery.
Electrophoresis of DNA, Restriction digestion of DNA, RNA isolation,
Primer design, PCR, RT-PCR, Competent cell preparation and BBV350 Special Module in Biochemical Engineering
Transformation, Gene Induction. and Biotechnology
BBL331 Bioprocess Engineering 1 Credit (1-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
BBD351 Mini project (BB)
Pre-requisite(s): BBL132, BBL133
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Microbial growth, substrate utilisation, and product formation kinetics;
simple structured models; batch, fed-batch, repeated fed-batch, Pre-requisite(s): EC 60
121

Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology Courses of Study 2024-2025
BBL431 Bioprocess Technology BBL443 Modelling and Simulation of Bioprocesses
2 Credits (2-0-0) 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): EC25 Pre-requisite(s): BBL331
Chemical vs biochemical processing; Substrates for bioconversion Types of kinetic models, Data smoothing and analysis, Mathematical
processes; Process technology for production of primary and representation of Bioprocesses, Parameter estimation, Numerical
secondary metabolites such as ethanol, lactic acid, citric acid, amino Integration techniques, Parameter Sensitivity analysis, Statistical
acids, biopolymers, industrial enzymes, penicillin, recombinant validity, Discrimination between two models. Case studies
glutathione and insulin. Physiological state markers and its use in the formulation of a
structured model, Development of compartment and metabolic
BBL432 Fluid Solid Systems pathway models (Software Probe) for intracellular state estimation.
Dynamic Simulation of batch, fed-batch steady and transient
2 Credits (2-0-0)
culture metabolism, Numerical Optimization of Bioprocesses using
Pre-requisite(s): CLL231 Mathematical models.
Size reduction; crushing and grinding; equipment for size reduction;
BBL444 Advanced Bioprocess Control
screening; design procedure; Flow of fluids past a stationary particle
for low, medium and high Reynolds numbers; sedimentation and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
sedimentation theory; thickeners and classifiers; flow through packed
Pre-requisite(s): CLL261
beds; flow distribution, packing and pressure drop calculations;
The course begins with an overview of classical control theory leading
fluidization; filtration theory and its application in plate and frame and
to a detailed analysis of the stability of biological systems. Lyapunov
rotary vacuum filters; solid-liquid separation using centrifugation; ‘Δ’
stability is introduced followed by concepts of nonlinear control
concept in centrifugation for scale-up; different types of centrifuges
theory and applications to bioreactors. Control loops in metabolic
and their design; application for biological suspensions.
and protein networks are discussed in the background evolution and
motifs selected by natural systems. This leads to the introduction of
BBL433 Enzyme Science and Engineering
large protein interaction networks and study of their architectures.
4 Credits (3-0-2) Applications of these ideas in apriori analysis of synthetic circuits are
Pre-requisite(s): BBL431 examined. The course ends with case studies from the literature.
Introduction and scope; Chemical and functional nature of enzymes; BBL445 Membrane Applications in Bioprocessing
Application of enzymes in process industries and health care; microbial
3 Credits (3-0-0)
production and purification of industrial enzymes; kinetics of enzyme
Milk/cheese processing, Fruit / sugarcane juice processing,
catalysed reactions; immobilization of enzymes; stabilization of
Pharmaceuticals / Therapeutic drugs processing and membrane
enzymes. Bioreactors for soluble and immobilized enzymes, mass
coupled separation of biomolecules; Membrane based bioreactor for
transfer and catalysis in immobilized reactors. Enzyme based
cell / enzyme recycle; Mammalian/plant cell culture; Case studies.
biosensors; enzyme catalysed process with cofactor regeneration;
Enzyme reactions in micro-aqueous medium and non-conventional BBL446 Biophysics
medium. Laboratory: Assay of enzyme activity and specific activity;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
kinetic analysis of an enzyme catalysed reaction; Immobilization of
enzymes by adsorption and covalent binding; salt precipitation of Pre-requisite(s): PYL101, BBL131
an enzyme; immobilization of microbial cells by entrapment; effect Spectroscopic methods in biophysics, conformational changes in
of water and solvent on the lipase catalysed esterification reaction. biological processes, biological energy conservation and transduction,
photosynthesis, transport across biomembranes, the biophysics
BBL434 Bioinformatics of motility, the biophysics of the nerve impulse, single molecule
3 Credits (2-0-2) biophysical studies.
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132 BBL447 Enzyme Catalyzed Organic Synthesis
The topics include introduction to bioinformatics - resources and 3 Credits (2-0-2)
applications, Biological sequence analysis, sequence alignment,
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131 and EC 90
molecular phylogenetic analysis, genome organization and analysis,
protein analysis, molecular modeling and drug design. Enzymes as biocatalysts. Various reaction media for enzyme catalyzed
reaction [water, water poor media such as organic solvents, ionic
BBL441 Food Science and Engineering liquids] and mixed solvents. Advantages of medium engineering.
Fundamentals of non-aqueous enzymology [pH memory, molecular
3 Credits (3-0-0)
imprinting]. Improving biocatalysis in water and water poor media
Chemical constituents of foods, their properties and functions; [chemical modification, immobilization, applications of protein
Characteristic features of natural and processed foods; Chemical / engineering/directed evolution]. Enzyme promiscuity and its
biochemical reactions in storage / handling of foods; Units operations applications in organic synthesis. Biocatalytic applications in organic
in food processing- size reduction, evaporation, filtration etc.; synthesis, hydrolytic reactions, oxidation reduction reactions, formation
Methods for food preservation; Rheology of food products; Flavour, of C-C bond, addition and elimination reactions, glycosyl transfer
aroma and other additives in processed foods; case studies of a few reactions, isomerization, halogenation/dehalogenation reactions.
specific food processing sectors, cereals, protein foods, meat, fish
and poultry, vegetable and fruit, milk products; legislation, safety BBD451 Major project part 1 (BB1)
and quality control. 3 Credits (0-0-6)
BBL442 Immunology BBD452 Major project part 2 (BB1)
4 Credits (3-0-2) 8 Credits (0-0-16)
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132, BBL231
BBL731 Bioseparation Engineering
Historical background, Innate and acquired immunity. Cells and organs
4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
of immune system. Molecules of immune system – immunoglobulins,
MHCs, Cytokines, T cell receptors. Generation of antibody and Pre-requisite(s): BBL331, BBL432, BBL433
T cell receptor diversity. Complement system. Humoral and Cell Revision of mechanical separation (filtration, Centrifugation etc.),
mediated immunity. Immune regulation. Vaccines. Hybridoma. cell disruption, Protein precipitation and its separation, Extraction,
Immunodeficiencies and AIDS. Transplantation immunity and cancer. Adsorption Desorption processes, Chromatographic methods based
122

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology
on size, charge, shape, biological affinity etc., Membrane separations- Stability analysis; analysis of multiple interacting microbial
ultrafiltration and electrodialysis, Electrophoresis, Crystallization, populations; stability of recombinant cells; Structured models of gene
Drying, Case studies. Laboratory: Conventional filtration batch & expression and growth, Cell cycle and age-dependent (segregated)
continuous, Centrifugation in batch and continuous centrifuge, models, Single-cell (stochastic) models of gene expression.
Cell disruption, Protein precipitation and its recovery, Thin Layer
BBL737 Instrumentation and Analytical Methods in
Chromatography (TLC), Membrane based filtration-ultrafiltration in
cross. Flow modules and microfiltration, electrodialysis, Adsorption Bioengineering
Column Studies and Freeze Drying Studies. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Laboratory: Cell disruption through various techniques, Filtration
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131
to understand Darcy’s law, Exposure to continuous filtration process,
Introduction to methods used in Analytical Bioengineering,
Understanding the centrifugation principles and calculate settling
Electrophoretic methods, Principles and applications of chromatography
velocity, Adsorption of dyes to understand the break-through curves,
(GC, HPLC, FPLC, HPTLC), Spectrophotometry (UV-visible),
Application of solvent extraction principles, Experience in packing the
Fluorescence methods, FTIR, Circular dichroism, Mass spectrometry
column for gel extraction chromatography, operation of gel filtration
(GC-MS, LC-MS, ICP-MS), Immunology based analytical methods
chromatography, Hands-on experience on HPLC, Construction of
(ELISA), qPCR, Advanced Microscopy techniques (Electron Microscopy,
SMB process.
Confocal Microscopy).
BBL732 Bioprocess plant Design
4 Credits (3-0-2) BBL740 plant Cell Technology
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 CLL251 CLL252 BBL331 BBL432
Introduction; General design information; Mass and energy balance; Pre-requisite(s): BBL331
Flow sheeting; Piping and instrumentation; Materials of construction Special features and organization of Plant cells. Totipotency,
for bioprocess plants; Mechanical design of process equipment; regeneration of plants, Plant products of Industrial importance.
Vessels for biotechnology applications; Design considerations for Biochemistry of major metabolic pathways & products. Autotrophic
maintaining sterility of process streams and processing equipment; and heterotrophic growth, Plant growth regulators and elicitors. Cell
Selection and specification of equipment for handling fluids and suspension culture development: nutrient optimization, growth and
solids; Selection, specification and design of heat and mass transfer production kinetics, Two stage cultivation. Cell Characterization.
equipment used in bioprocess industries; Utilities for biotechnology Optimization strategies using suspension cultures for some plant
production plants; Process economics; Bioprocess validation; Safety metabolites. Biological and technological barriers-hydrodynamic
considerations; Case studies. shear assessment and its quantification, mixing and impeller design
Laboratory: Design of the complete process plant for an identified aspects. Novel designs of Plant cell reactors: comparison of reactor
product or service. Each student to choose a separate product/industry performances. Plant cell Immobilization protocols & their advantages.
Immobilized plant cell & cell retention reactors. Design of spherical
BBL733 Recombinant DNA Technology
immobilized cell aggregates. Hairy root induction, Mass propagation
3.5 Credits (2-0-3) in gas/liquid phase bioreactor configurations with case studies. Use
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132, BBL231 or Masters’ degree of mathematical model based optimization for different cultivation
strategies. Endophytes: In vitro platforms for production of plant
in Bioscience
secondary metabolites with case histories.
Restriction and other modifying enzymes, Cloning vectors (plasmid,
Laboratory: Importance of nutrients, role of different media in growth
(-based, phagemids, high capacity) and expression vectors, Expression
of different plants parts, Preparation of media; Development of callus
in bacterial, yeast and mammalian systems, Construction of genomic
of a plant; Development of homogenous shake flask suspension
and cDNA libraries, DNA Sequencing, Polymerase chain reaction,
culture of plant cells; Study of growth, product formation kinetics of
Invitro mutagenesis, Genome mapping, Stability of recombinant cells
suspension culture; Study of shear sensitivity of plants cells by viability
in production of biochemicals.
assessment; Propagation of plant cells in bioreactors and assessment
BBL734 Metabolic Regulation and Engineering of key kinetic parameters; Hairy root induction of a plant; Analysis
of plant cell/hairy root metabolites.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): BBL331, BBL431 BBL741 protein Science and Engineering
Regulatory mechanisms for control of enzyme synthesis - an overview; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Control of enzyme activity- proteolysis, covalent modification and
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131 BBL231 or Masters’ degree in
ligand binding; Metabolic control theory and metabolic flux analysis;
Bioscience
Metabolic regulation of a few major metabolic pathways especially
those relevant to bioprocess industries; Pathway engineering; Introduction and aim; Basic structural principles of proteins-amino
Application of gene cloning in re-directing cellular metabolism for acids; Motifs of protein structure and their packing: alpha domain,
over-production of a few industrial products; Strategies to overcome alpha/Beta domain, Antiparallel B structures; Protein folding and
regulatory mechanisms for over-production of several industrially assembly – protein folding pathways for single and multiple domain
important primary and secondary metabolites such as alcohols, proteins; Recovery of active proteins from inclusion bodies; Structure
organic acids, amino acids, enzymes and therapeutic compounds. prediction-structural classes, secondary and tertiary protein structure
prediction; Sequence homology searches; Strategies for protein
BBL735 Genomics and proteomics
engineering – random, site-directed, case studies; Drug-protein
3 Credits (2-0-2) interactions and design, Rational protein design.
Pre-requisite(s): BBL231, BBL733
BBL742 Biological Waste Treatment
Introduction to -omes and -omics; GENOMICS - Genome sequencing
4 Credits (3-0-2)
and assembly; Next-generation sequencing; Studying gene expression
and function; High throughput gene expression and analysis. Pre-requisite(s): BBL132, BBL331 or Bachelor’s degree in
PROTEOMICS - Sample preparation; Separation methods; Mass Engineering or Masters’ degree in Science
Spectroscopy and de novo sequencing; Comparative Proteomics; Qualitative and quantitative characterization of wastes; Waste disposal
Protein-protein interactions. norms and regulations; Indian regulations; Principles of biological
BBL736 Dynamics of Microbial Systems treatment; Aerobic and anaerobic biological wastewater treatment
systems; Suspended and attached cell biological wastewater treatment
3 Credits (3-0-0)
systems; Biological nutrient removal; Treatment plant design
Pre-requisite(s): BBL331, BBL432, BBL433 calculations; Treatment and disposal of sludge; biological means for
112233

Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology Courses of Study 2024-2025
stabilization and disposal of solid wastes; Treatment of hazardous and This course provides students with a deeper understanding of cancer
toxic wastes; Degradation of xenobiotic compounds; bioremediation. biology and is heavily focused on experiments: Topics include: Cancer
Laboratory: Characterization of wastes; Design calculations for Biology Overview, Types of Cancer, Causes for cancer, Oncogenes and
various types of wastes using various types of biological processes. Tumor suppressors, Cell Cycle and Regulation, Cell Differentiation, Cell
Death Pathways (Apoptosis, Autophagy), Necrosis, Cell Senescence,
BBL743 High Resolution Methods in Biotechnology
Cell Adhesion and Motility, Cancer Epigenetics and sRNAs, Cancer
3 Credits (2-0-2) Genome instability, Tumor Immunity, Growth Signaling pathways,
Tumor angiogenesis, Cancer Stem Cell, Diagnosis, prognosis and
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL331 or Masters’ degree in
treatment of cancer.
Bioscience
Laboratory: Experiments on Cell cycle, Differentiation, Necrosis and
Need for high resolution separation for biologicals; Difficulties with
Apoptosis, Senescence, Anchorage Independence, Cell Migration and
traditional methodologies; Affinity precipitation and partitioning; MF/
Invasion, MicroRNAs, Stem cell, Fluorescence Microscopy.
UF/NF for high resolution separation; chromatography techniques;
Affinity chromatography and electrophoresis, Separation by gene BBL750 Genome Engineering
amplification (PCR), Molecular imprinting.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
BBL744 Animal Cell Technology Genome engineering methods for bacteria, yeast, plants and
mammalian cells, Newer gene delivery methods, Next generation
4 Credits (3-0-2)
cloning technologies.
Characteristic of animal cell, metabolism, regulation and nutritional
requirements; Kinetics of cell growth and product formation and BBL751 Biotechnology Entrepreneurship
effect of shear force; Product and substrate transport; Perfusion
2 Credits (2-0-0)
bioreactors, Hollow fiber bioreactor, Operational strategies and
Introduction to biotechnology. Agri, Medical and Environment sectors.
integrated approach; Micro and macro carrier culture; Hybridoma
Role of innovation, evaluating business idea and potential, Legality
technology; Genetic engineering in animal cell culture; Scale-up and
behind company formation, team for delivery, business plan, IPR
large scale operation; Case studies.
issues, licensing, capital and investors, regulatory approvals and
Laboratory: Cell culture in static phase (T-flask), quantification of
good manufacturing principles.
cell growth, monolayer culture, determination of critical shear stress,
micro carrier, Cell viability assay. Case studies to understand growth BBL752 Microbial Ecology
kinetics and product kinetics in actul cell culture system.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
BBL745 Combinatorial Biotechnology Pre-requisite(s): BBL132
3 Credits (3-0-0) Microbial diversity, interactions, communities; Microbial community
Solid phase synthesis, solution phase synthesis, encoding structure vs. function; Microbiomes in natural ecosystems: terrestrial
technologies, deconvolution methods, Tools for Combinatorial and aquatic, extreme environments; Interactions of microbiomes
Biotechnology, Display libraries, Applications. with higher organisms (Humans and Plants); Microbial functions in
biogeochemical cycles; Methodological advances in Microbial Ecology:
BBL746 Current Topics in Biochemical Engineering and Novel strategies for culturing the “unculturables”, Era of “Omics”,
Biotechnology Quantitative and qualitative methods for characterization of microbial
3 Credits (3-0-0) communities; Role of microbial ecology in crucial environmental
issues, viz. climate change, sustainability, pollution.
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL331
BBL754 Optics within Life Science
BBL747 Bionanotechnology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): BBL132
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131 or Masters’ degree in Bioscience
Course will cover nature of light-matter interaction, fundamentals
Introduction, Self-assembly of biomolecules in nanotechnology; of absorbance, fluorescence and scattering. All the components in
Bacterial S-Layer, Biomimetic Ferritin, Biodegradable nanoparticles spectroscopic and imaging technologies i.e., light source to detectors
for drug delivery to cells and tissues, Polymer Nanocontainers, Ion will be discussed. Properties of optical probes, various spectroscopic
channels as molecular switches, Patch clamp technique, Protein based and imaging techniques used to study biological samples. Including;
nanoelectronics, Bacteriorhodopsin and its technical applications, confocal, TIRF, non-linear, in vivo, super resolution and single
Carbon Nanotubes: Towards next generation biosensors, Molecular molecule imaging.
Lego: Design for molecular actuators, Biological Membranes,
Magnetosomes: Trapping nano-magnetite in biological membranes, BBL756 plasmid Biology
Biomolecular Motors, Techniques used in Bionanotechnology 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Nanoanalytics: Fluorescent Quantum Dots for Biological Labelling,
Pre-requisite(s): BBL231
Nanoparticle Molecular Labels.
Plasmid nomenclature, classification, replication, segregation,
BBL748 Data Analysis for DNA Microarrays incompatibility, stability, host range, significance in environment,
4 Credits (3-0-2) health and biotechnology.
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL231, BBL733 BBL757 Electromicrobiologyu and Bioelectrochemical
Microarray technology, Basic digital imaging and image processing, Systems
Probabilities, common distributions, Bayes’ theorem, Analyzing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
microarray data with classical hypothesis testing, Analysis of variance,
Common electroactive microorganisms (shewanella, Geobacter, weak
Experimental Design, Analysis and visualization tools: Box plots,
electricigens); Microbial extracellular electron transfer (direct electron
Scatter plots, Histograms, Cluster Analysis: one-way, two-way,
transfer, mediated electron transfer using soluble electron shuttles,
Graphic, Methods for selection of differentially regulated genes,
microbial nanowires); Electrolytes in bioelectrochemical experiments
Hypothesis driven experiments using focused microarrays, Biological
(electrolytes as microbial growth medium, ion transport in electrolytes);
interpretation, Commercial software available.
Bio-electrodes (biofilm formation, role of planktonic electroactive
BBL749 Cancer Cell Biology community members, electrochemical features of the interface);
Basics of electrochemical cells (electrode potenitial, thermodynamics,
4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
kinetics, overpotential, half-cell reactions, combining two half-cells,
Pre-requisite(s): BBL131, BBL132, BBL231 three-electrode set-ups); Characterisation of live electroactive
124

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biochemical Engineering and Biotechnology
microbial cultures using voltammetry, chronoamperometry, BBL775 Bioreaction Engineering
chronocoulometry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; 4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
Microbial fuel cells (power production, wastewater treatment, scale-up
issues, common calculations, configurations and materials); microbial Pre-requisite(s): BBL773, BBL772
electrolysis cells (hydrogen and commodity chemical production); Reaction network theory: Stoichiometry and kinetics of enzymatic
electrofermentation; bioelectrochemical sensors. reactions and cellular growth; Momentum transfer theory: Mixing of
gas, solids, and liquids in a bioreactor; Heat transfer theory: Design of
BBV750 Bioreaction Engineering cooling system; Mass transfer theory: Oxygen balances; Ideal reactor
1 Credit (1-0-0) theory (batch, CSTR, recycle, fed-batch, PFR); Elemental balances:
Checking data consistency.
Pre-requisite(s): Undergraduate or M.Sc. level in Biochem/
Biology or Chem. Engg.
BBL810 Enzyme and Microbial Technology
Definitions of volumetric and specific rates. Yield and productivity
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of bioprocesses. Coupling of steady state black box stoichiometrics.
Isolation, development and preservation of industrial microorganisms;
Metabolic Flux Analysis. Transient operation, and the sensitivity of
Substrates for industrial microbial processes; Regulatory mechanisms
coupled enzymatic reactions to changes in the pathway flux. Design of
of metabolic pathways in industrial strains; Analysis of various
bio-reactors with volumetric isotropy. The role of mixing in industrial
microbial processes used in production of biomass, primary and
bio-reactions. Large scale processes.
secondary metabolites; Microbial leaching of minerals; Microorganisms
BBL771 Microbial Biochemistry and Molecular Biology in degradation of xenobiotics and removal of heavy metals;
4 Credits (3-0-2) Biotransformations. Enzymes as industrial biocatalysts; production;
isolation; purification and application of industrial enzymes;
Pre-requisite(s): Basic biology (Class 10 level)
immobilized enzymes; stabilization of enzymes; enzyme catalyzed
Overlaps with: BBL131, BBL231, BBL830, SBL751 organic synthesis; multienzyme systems.
Course contents: Cell, Structure of biomolecules nucleic acids,
proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. Metabolism, biological membranes BBL820 Downstream processing
Genome, Mutagenesis, Plasmids and vectors, Restriction enzymes 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and PCR, Ligation, Transformation, Bacteriophages, DNA Replication,
Characteristics of biological materials; Pre-treatment;, Microbial
Transcription, Translation, Gene regulation.
separation: Centrifugation and filtration, Cell disruption methods,
BBL772 Data Analytics and Informatics for Biotechnology Protein precipitation, Extraction, Adsorption, Electrophoresis,
Chromatography, Ultrafiltration, Reverse osmosis, Isoelectric focusing,
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Affinity based separations, Case Studies.
Pre-requisite(s): Basic Mathematics (Class 10 level)
Overlaps with: SBL701, MSL874 BBL830 Microbial Biochemisry
Module 1 (Statistics for engineers) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
• Introduction to data in Biotechnological applications and Error Structure and function of biomolecules amino acids, proteins, lipids,
Analysis nucleotides and nucleic acids: Enzymes-structure and kinetics,
• Introduction to statistical programming Vitamins and coenzymes, Metabolic pathways: Carbohydrate
• Data visualization; Measures of Location and Dispersion metabolism: glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, citric acid cycle;
• Probability and Common Probability Distributions Bioenergetics oxidative phosphorylation and photo-synthesis: Fatty
• Point Estimation and central limit theorem acid metabolism; Amino acid metabolism; Regulatory mechanisms-
• Confidence Interval, Hypothesis Testing and Types of errors feedback inhibition, induction, catabolite repression; Nucleic acid and
• Regression for engineers, Correlation, and Calibration protein biosynthesis.
• Design and Analysis of Experiments
Module 2 (Bioinformatics) BBp840 Laboratory Techniques in Microbial Biochemistry
• Bioinformatic data generation technologies 2 Credits (0-0-4)
• Bioinformatic databases Estimation of carbohydrates/proteins/nucleic acids; separation of
• Essential problems in Bioinformatics - Alignment, Assembly, Mapping phospho-lipids by thin layer chromatography; chromatographic
separation of proteins; identification and estimation of intermediates
BBL773 Applied Mathematics for Biochemical
of glycolytic pathway; oxidative phosphorylation; cell fractionation;
Engineering aseptic techniques; microscopic examination of bacteria & fungi;
3 Credits (3-0-0) selected biochemical tests; plasmid DNA preparation; expression of
cloned DNA in bacteria; isolation of auxotrophic mutants.
Pre-requisite(s): Basic Mathematics (Class 10 level)
Concept of functions and their graphs; calculation of ordinary and partial
derivatives; derivation of differential equations arising from mass, BBL850 Advanced Biochemical Engineering
momentum, and energy conservation; solution of ordinary differential 5 Credits (3-0-4)
equations using geometric, numerical, and analytical methods. Kinetics of cell growth; Mathematical models for substrate uptake
and product formation; Plasmid stability in recombinant cell cultures;
BBL774 Biomolecular Engineering
Kinetics of enzyme-catalyzed reactions; Media and air sterilization;
4 Credits (3-0-2) Cell cultivation strategies; Novel bioreactor designs; Developments
Pre-requisite(s): BBL771 in aeration & agitation in bioreactors; immobilized whole cell and
immobilized enzyme reactors; RTD and mixing in bioreactors;
Course contents: Importance of engineering Biomolecules: Nucleic
Dynamics of mixed cultures; Scale-up and scale down of bioreactors.
acids, Proteins, Carbohydrates and lipids. Enzymes used in genetic
manipulation, cassette assembly methods, genome engineering Laboratory: Microbial growth and product formation kinetics;
using ZFNs, TALENs, CRISPR, genetic code reprogramming, Protein enzyme kinetics; Effects of inhibitor on microbial growth; enzyme
engineering methods such as mutagenesis, shuffling, RACHITT immobilization techniques; Bioconversion using immobilized enzyme
etc., Engineering carbohydrates and lipids, Cell based vs synthetic preparation; Bioconversion in batch, fedbatch and continuous
systems, carbohydrate-mimetic peptides (CMPs), Engineering lipid bioreactors; Oxygen transfer studies in fermentation; Mixing and
bilayer membranes for different applications, substrate based cellular agitation in fermenters; RTD studies; Mass transfer in immobilized
Engineering. cell/enzyme reactors.
112255

Department of Chemical Engineering
CLL110 Transport phenomena Temperature and pressure effects on reactions and reactor design,
4 Credits (3-1-0) simultaneous material and energy balances, multiple steady-states.
Residence time distributions in non ideal reactors.
Vector and tensor analysis. Euler/Lagrangian viewpoint of momentum
transport, stress tensor and Newton’s law of viscosity, shell momentum
CLL133 powder processing and Technology
balances. Derivation of equations of change for isothermal, non-
isothermal, and multicomponent systems. Solutions to 1D flow 3 Credits (3-0-0)
problems involving Newtonian or non-Newtonian fluids, friction Powder characterization for size, shape, surface area and flowability
factor. Mechanisms of energy transport, energy flux for conduction, and relation between them. Characterization techniques: light
convection and viscous dissipation, solutions to 1D conduction and scattering, light extinction, sedimentation, ultrasonic methods.
convection problems. Mechanisms of mass transport, mass and molar Powder storage: designing of silos, flow of powders, measurement
diffusion fluxes, derivation and application of continuity equation to of flow factors, analytical methods for flow problems in chutes,
mass transfer in binary mixtures. Dimensional analysis of equations cyclones and silos, funnel and mass flow. Segregation of powder
of change to solve higher dimensional transport problems. Unsteady- during flow through chutes and air-induced flows. Segregation during
state momentum, heat, and mass transport. heap formation. Comminution equipment: selection and designing.
Particle size control in grinding circuit analysis. Gas-solid separation
CLL111 Material and Energy Balances equipment, application for pollution control.
4 Credits (2-2-0)
CLL141 Introduction to Materials for Chemical Engineers
Mathematics and engineering calculations, dimensional groups and
constants. Vapour pressure; Clausius-Clapeyron equation, Cox chart, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Duhring’s plot, Raoult’s law. Humidity and saturation, humid heat, Brief introduction to crystalline solids - metals and semiconductors,
humid volume, dew point, humidity chart and its use. Crystallization, types of atomic bonding and lattices. Semi-crystalline materials -
dissolution. Ideal gas behavior. Material balance: solving material ceramics, polymers, copolymers, liquid crystals and surfactants.
balance problems with and without chemical reaction, recycle, bypass Amorphous and composite systems such as glass, fibers, granular
and purge calculations, aid of computers in solving material balance materials, matrices and alloys. Role of materials selection in design,
problems. Energy balance: closed and open systems, heat capacity, structure-property-processing-performance relationships. Materials
calculation of enthalpy changes, energy balances with chemical characterization via experimental techniques. Special materials like
reaction, heat of vaporization, heat of formation, heat of combination, biomaterials and zeolites.
heat of reaction.
CLL222 Chemical Reaction Engineering II
CLL113 Numerical Methods in Chemical Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL122
Overlaps with: MTL107, MTP290, MTL445, CVL734, COL726 Definition of catalysis, homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis.
Estimation and round-off error calculations. Solution of linear Adsorption on catalytic surfaces, kinetic models, catalyst preparation,
algebraic equations via Gauss elimination, matrix inversion and LU physical characterization of catalysts, supported metal catalysts.
decomposition, Gauss-Seidel method. Solving non-linear algebraic Mass transfer and internal diffusion effects in catalytic reactions,
equations with the help of root finding. Numerical integration and Thiele modulus and effectiveness factor, falsification of kinetics,
differentiation. Solution of ordinary differential equations encountered catalyst deactivation.
in initial/boundary value problems via implicit and explicit methods,
Packed bed reactor design, introduction to other multiphase
solution of partial differential equations, Chemical engineering
reactors, gas-liquid reactors and enhancement factor. Gas-solid non-
problems where the above mentioned numerical schemes are involved
catalytic reactions.
will be illustrated.
CLL231 Fluid Mechanics for Chemical Engineers
CLL121 Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics
4 Credits (3-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
Overlaps with: MCL140, MCL141, MCL142
Overlaps with: APL107, APL106, APL105
Review of conservation of energy, mass and introduction to work-
Introduction to fluids, Forces on fluids, Fluid statics, Hydrostatic
energy conversions, and the concept of entropy. Application to closed
force on submerged bodies, Rigid body motion, Kinematics of flow
and open systems, application in analysis of energy and efficiency
- Eulerian and Lagrangian descriptions, Flow visualization, Integral
of equipment. State and properties of pure fluids under different
analysis - mass and momentum balances, Bernoulli equation, Flow
conditions and in flow through equipment. Use of equations of
through pipes and ducts, Flow measurement, Flow transportation
states, graphs, correlations and tables to estimate fluid properties,
- pumps, blowers and compressors, Differential analysis of flow,
understanding the relationships between fluid properties and changes
Conservation of mass, linear and angular momentum, Navier-Stokes
in properties. Equilibrium properties of pure materials and mixtures.
equation, Unidirectional flows, Viscous flows, Skin friction and form
Understanding the phase behaviour and phase transitions of pure
friction, Lubrication approximation, Potential flows, Boundary layer
fluids. Thermodynamic analysis of fluids in standard fixtures and
theory, Blasius equation for flow over a flat plate, Boundary layer
equipment (piping fixtures, power plants, engines, refrigerators).
separation, Drag and lift force on immersed bodies, Similitude
Equilibrium behaviour of mixtures of fluids, the nature of interactions
analysis, Turbulent flows.
between various fluids and how interactions affect their properties
and phase transitions. Introduction to separation processes based
on difference in equilibrium thermodynamic properties. Introduction CLL251 Heat Transfer for Chemical Engineers
to reaction equilibria. 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
CLL122 Chemical Reaction Engineering I
Overlaps with: MCL242
4 Credits (3-1-0) Modes of heat transfer - conduction, convection, radiation; Heat
Introduction to rate equations, calculation of conversion in single transfer coefficients in natural and forced convection; Basic
reaction, kinetics of homogeneous reactions. Derivation of reactor conservation equations; Heat transfer with phase change; Design of
design equations, analysis and sizing of reactors, data collection double pipe heat exchangers, shell and tube heat exchangers and
and plotting to determine rate constants. Reactor networks (series/ evaporators; Introduction to radiative heat transfer. Unsteady state
parallel), concepts of selectivity and yield, reaction mechanisms. heat transfer. Two-dimensional heat transfer problems.
126

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemical Engineering
CLL252 Mass Transfer I CLp303 Chemical Engineering Laboratory III
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110 Pre-requisite(s): CLL121, CLL122, CLL222
Lattice, Fick’s, Stefan-Maxwell, Stokes-Einstein and irreversible Practicals in reaction engineering, thermodynamics and chemical
thermodynamic approaches to diffusivity of binary and multicomponent processing.
system. Film theory and other theories of mass transfer. Analogy and
correlation approaches to mass transfer coefficients in interphase CLL331 Fluid-particle Mechanics
mass transfer. Analysis of co-current, counter-current and cross 4 Credits (3-1-0)
flow stage cascades. Design and operating conditions of differential
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, CLL231
contact equipment such as packed towers for absorption, adsorption,
drying and leaching. Introduction to industries dealing with the particles (solid, liquid, gas,
soft-materials: colloids, polymer), solid particles: particle size, shape
CLL261 process Dynamics and Control
and their distribution, relationship among shape factors and particle
4 Credits (3-1-0) dimensions, specific surface area, measurement of surface area and
particle size distribution, drag coefficient, packed bed, fluidization.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL100, CLL111
Sedimentation: settling, hindered settling, design of settling tank,
Overlaps with: MCL212, ELL225, ELL205
filtration, centrifugal separation, cyclone separator, mixing (solid-solid,
Introduction to automation, block diagrams; revision of Laplace solid-liquid and liquid-liquid), segregation.
transform. Modeling based on transfer function approach, open-loop
Size reduction, size enlargement, flow properties of slurries, behaviour
systems: dynamic response of first order systems, first order systems
of colloidal particles in dispersed condition.
in series, second order systems, and transportation lag. Feedback
control: P, PI, PID controllers. Dynamic response of closed loop CLL352 Mass Transfer II
systems Linear stability analysis: Routh stability criterion, root locus
4 Credits (3-1-0)
diagrams. Frequency response: Bode diagrams, Nyquist diagrams,
Bode and Nyquist stability criterion. Controller tuning: Zeigler- Pre-requisite(s): CLL252
Nichols and Cohen-Coon methods. Introduction to advanced control: Review of VLE. Separation quantification: separation factor, relative
feedforward control, cascade control, dead time compensation, ratio volatility, key components, flash: graphical and algebraic (Richford-
control, internal model control. Rice) method. Differential distillation, binary distillation: McCabe-
CLL271 Introduction to Industrial Biotechnology Thiele method - minimum reflux, minimum number of stages, open
steam, multiple feeds, side streams. Packed columns - HETP, HTU
3 Credits (3-0-0)
method. Column pressure. Tray efficiency. Column sizing, sieve tray
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110 design, packed column design.
Overlaps with: BEN150, BBL431, BBL731 LLE - equilibrium diagram, selection of solvent, design calculations
for single stage, cascade of stages using Hunter and Nash graphical
Introduction to biopharmaceutical industry. Monod kinetics. Michaelis
method, McCabe-Thiele method, continuous contacting.
Menten kinetics. Introduction to the different bioprocessing unit
operations utilized in production of biotech drugs - upstream, Multicomponent system: selection of key components, approximate
harvest, and downstream. Design, control and scale up of bioreactor. - FUG method, DOF for cascade of stages, MESH formulation,
Introduction to analytical methods used for characterization of biotech introduction to azeotropic and extractive distillation, adsoption
products and processes (high performance liquid chromatography, equilibrium, breakthrough curve.
mass spectrophotometry, capillary electrophoresis, near infrared
CLL361 Instrumentation and Automation
spectroscopy, UV spectroscopy). Fundamentals and design of
filtration and other membrane based separation techniques. Process 2.5 Credits (1-0-3)
chromatography - theory, practice, design and scale-up. Mixing,
Pre-requisite(s): CLL261
heat transfer and mass transfer in bioprocessing unit operations.
Signals and standards (pneumatic, voltage, current). Basics of
Scale-up of filtration and chromatography unit operations utilized in
control loop components: sensors, transmitters, transducers, control
bioprocessing: procedures, issues that frequently occur and possible
valves, and converters. Measurement devices for process variables:
solutions. Process design, control and optimization. Current topics in
temperature, pressure, level, flow, pH, humidity, density, and viscosity.
biopharmaceutical technology.
Control valves, actuators, positioners; computer-based control
CLL296 Nano-engineering of Soft Materials systems: PLC, DCS, SCADA.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CLL371 Chemical process Technology and Economics
Pre-requisite(s): CLL121
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Overlaps with: PYL421
Pre-requisite(s): CLL252, CLL122
Mathematical characterization of phase transitions in soft matter, e.g.
Introduction to process flowsheet, equipment symbols and sections
thin films, polymers and colloidal suspensions. Universality in phase
of a chemical plant. Use of flowsheeting software. Process synthesis
separation kinetics. Evolution of order parameter. Time dependent
and process flow diagrams of chemical plants (gas-liquid, liquid-
mean field theories (MFTs). Kinetically-driven morphological changes
solid, gas-liquid-solid handling plants). Fertilizer technology:
in nano-pattern formation in thin films. Colloidal crystallization and
manufacture of fertilizers including naphtha reforming, air separation,
at liquid fronts. Field-induced effects on assembly in complex fluids.
ammonia synthesis technology. Utilities and safety issues in fertilizer
CLp301 Chemical Engineering Laboratory I plants. Chlor-alkali and sulfuric acid manufacturing. Refining and
petrochemical technology: Crude occurrence, properties, distillation,
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
refinery processes and technology, petrochemical technologies. Semi-
Pre-requisite(s): CLL231, CLL251 conductor chip manufacturing. food technology. Safety and hazard
Practicals in fluid mechanics and heat transfer. analysis, and debottlenecking of chemical plants. Introduction to
process engineering economics.
CLp302 Chemical Engineering Laboratory II
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) CLL390 process Utilities and pipeline Design
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL331, CLL252
Practicals in unit operations, mechanical operations, fluid-particle Pre-requisite(s): CLL231
mechanics and principles of mass transfer. Transportation and measurement of utilities like air, water and steam.
127

Chemical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Handling of steam. Design of insulation for steam carrying pipes, CLL701 Modelling of Transport processes
water hammer. Design of flash tank. Water treatment and reduction of 2 Credits (2-0-0)
scaling. Storage tank analysis for water. Piping network design, fittings
and valves. Air treatment: cleaning and Dehumidification, design of Overlaps with: CLL110, CLL113, MTL107, MTL445, COL726
refrigeration and air-conditioning systems. Transportation of air: duct Fundamentals of momentum transport, Mass and momentum
design, selection of blowers and compressors. Instrumentation and conservation equations and their application to solve 1-D problems,
control for fluid transportation. Energy audit for industrial air and Fundamentals of heat transport, Equation of energy/temperature and
steam handling systems. its application to solve problems involving conduction, Fundamentals
of mass transport, Equation of mass conservation and its application
CLL402 process plant Design to solve problem involving binary diffusion.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Introduction to methods for solution of algebraic equations, Methods
for solution of ODEs, Functions, approximations and regression
Pre-requisite(s): CLL371 analysis, Introduction to Design of Experiments.
Overlaps with: CLL703
CLL702 principles of Thermodynamics, Reaction
Plant layout and flowsheeting. Issues related to materials
Kinetics and Reactors
handling, equipment selection and design (pumps, blowers and
compressions, mixers, conveyors, seperation columns, reactors), 2 Credits (2-0-0)
utilities and auxiliaries, offsite facilities. Cost estimation. Selection Overlaps with: CLL121, CLL122, MCL140, MCL141, MCL142
and detailed design of equipment. Steam handling. Valves, piping
Introduction to thermodynamics; Notion of equilibrium, states and
and instrumentation. Environmental footprint assessment, pollution
reversibility; First and Second Laws of Thermodynamics; Equation
reduction, and life cycle analysis of process plant.
of state; Equilibrium behavior of mixtures of fluids; Phase equilibria
and VLE; Reaction thermodynamics.
CLD411 B. Tech. project
Reaction equilibria and chemical kinetics; Ideal reactors; Isothermal
4 Credits (0-0-8) reactor design; Temperature and pressure effects in Ideal reactors;
Formulation of the problem. Literature search. Design and fabrication Heterogeneous catalysis and effectiveness factors; Fluid-solid non-
of the experimental setup. Study of experimental techniques catalytic reactions.
in the case of experimental projects. Formulation of equations
CLL703 process Engineering
and analytical/numerical solution in case of modeling projects.
Development of software. Analysis of results. Presentation of results 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and scientific reporting in form of thesis and presentation. Process synthesis, material balances and decision making in reactors
with recycle streams, input-output structure of flowsheet for batch
CLD412 Major project in Energy and Environment vs. continuous reactors, hierarchial approach for process engineering
design, reactor and separation system selection guidelines,
5 Credits (0-0-10)
distillation column sequencing, heat exchanger network design,
Pre-requisite(s): CLD411 pinch technology, utility selection, grand composite curve, steam and
cooling water circuits, integration of heat pumps and heat engines
CLD413 Major project in Complex Fluids Process economics: Cost estimation, annuities, perpetuities
5 Credits (0-0-10) and present value, tax and depreciation, profitability measures,
comparison of equipments and projects, NPV, IRR, risk management.
Pre-requisite(s): CLD411
Process modeling tools: AspenPlus® or Promax that are used in
industry for large scale problem solving to undertake problems of
CLD414 Major project in process Engineering, Modeling
current interest.
and Optimization
CLL704 Natural Gas processing
5 Credits (0-0-10)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLD411
Pre-requisite(s): CLL251 and CLL352
CLD415 Major project in Biopharmaceuticals and Fine Origin and classification of raw natural gas; combustion characteristics
and specifications of natural gas products; wellhead operations; gas
Chemicals
dehydration; gas sweetening; gas hydrate formation, prediction, and
5 Credits (0-0-10) inhibition; pigging; three-phase separation; amine-acid gas chemistry;
Pre-requisite(s): CLD411 gas absorption/ adsorption; cryogenic fractionation; membrane
separation; nonregenerative and biological acid gas removal; water-
CLL475 Safety and Hazards in process Industries hydrocarbon phase diagrams and dehydration; Glycol and Drizo
processes; natural gas liquids recovery; sulfur recovery.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CLp704 Technical Communication for Chemical
Pre-requisite(s): CLL371
Engineers
Loss statistics and prevention. Fires and explosions. Hazards related
to static electricity. Safety system designs for prevention of fire and 1 Credit (0-0-2)
explosions. Hazards due to toxicity. Industrial hygiene. Hazards Technical paper and report writing, Knowledge of leading Chemical
identification and risk assessment methods. Event probability and Engineering journals and conferences, carrying out literature search,
failure frequency analysis. Case studies. research methodology, paper referencing and critiquing, ethics and
plagiarism, improving presentation and communication skills.
CLL477 Materials of Construction
CLL705 petroleum Reservoir Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL371
Types and mechanisms of corrosion, factors influencing corrosion. Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, CLL121
Corrosion testing methods. Combating corrosion in metals and non- Introduction of static model including porosity, permeability,
metals. High and low temperature materials. Selection of materials of compressibility and saturations. Crude oil phase behaviour and
construction for handling different chemicals. Industrial applications their measurement techniques for reservoir and laboratory settings.
and case studies. Meaning and calculation of ‘oil in place’ numbers with respect to
128

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemical Engineering
different recovery mechanisms. Material balance for hydrocarbon activation kinetics. Fuel cell charge and mass transport - transport
reservoirs. Pressure transient analysis. Primary, secondary and in flow field, electrode and electrolyte. Fuel cell characterization- in-
tertiary recovery mechanisms, Buckley- Leverett theory (fractional situ and ex-situ characterization techniques, I-V curve, application
flow curves) for immiscible and miscible displacement. Production of voltammetry and frequency response analyses. Fuel cell modeling
forecasting and introduction to reservoir simulation. and system integration. Fuel cell diagnostics. Balance of plant.
Different routes of hydrogen generation: electrolysis versus reforming
CLL706 petroleum production Engineering
for hydrogen production, solar hydrogen. Hydrogen storage and
3 Credits (3-0-0) transportation, safety issues. Cost expectation and life cycle analysis.
Pre-requisite(s): CLL231, CLL121
CLL724 Environmental Engineering and Waste
Basic concepts: well drilling, well completions, drive mechanisms Management
for different reservoirs, Darcy’s law. Movement of fluids in the well,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
different artificial lift mechanisms, VLP (vertical lift performance
curves), IPR (inflow performance relationships). Well analysis Overlaps with: CVL100, CVL212, CVL311, CVL312, BBL742
tools (different well performance curves, well logging). Problem The course covers the concept of ecological balance and the
identification in wells (examples). Well stimulation techniques. contribution of industrial and human activities in the changes of the
environmental quality. Ecological cycles. Concept of pollutants and
CLL707 population Balance Modeling
regulatory measures for the maintenance of environmental quality.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Air pollution sources and its dependence on the atmospheric factors,
Pre-requisite(s): MTL101, CLL331, CLL352 atmospheric stability and dispersion of pollutants. Control of emission
of pollutants using multi-cyclone systems, electrostatic precipitators,
Theory of crystallization. Particle size distribution, particle phase
bag filters, wet scrubbers for gas cleaning, adsorption by activated
space. Population balance equation for convection in state space
carbon etc. Water pollution, its causes and effects. Pollutants and its
(pure growth). Solution of PBE using method of characteristics. PBE
dispersion in water bodies to predict water quality through modeling.
with breakage and coalescence/aggregation terms. Scaling theory
Concept of inorganic and organic wastes and definition of BOD and
and phenomenological models for rate of breakage and coalescence
COD. Control of water pollution by primary treatment and biological
induced by turbulence. Solution of PBE for pure breakage and pure
treatment systems. Solid waste management systems. Hazardous
coalescence. Moment transformation of PBE. Numerical approaches
waste treatment, disposal and storage in engineered landfill.
to solve PBE. Integrating PBE with transport equations.
CLL720 principles of Electrochemical Engineering CLL725 Air pollution Control Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Volta and Galvani potentials, electrochemical potential, electrochemical Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
equilibrium, Nernst equation. Born-Haber cycle for enthalpy and Gibbs Overview of air pollution from mobile and stationary sources. Modeling
free energy calculation, conventions for ionic species, solvation of emission profile from IC engine. Effect of fuel type and quality
energy, ionic equilibrium. Electrochemical cell, standard electrode and engine performance on air quality. Automotive catalysts and
potential, Pourbaix diagram, Donnan potential, reversible electrode. monoliths. Diesel particulate filters and their operation. Selective
Born model for ion-solvation energy. Ion-ion interactions: Debye- catalytic reduction. Stationary sources of air pollutants. Household
Huckel theory, activity coefficient of ionic solution, ion pair, Bjerrum pollutants and control of indoor air quality. Control of pollutants from
theory and Fuoss theory. Ionic transport: migration, extended power plants.
Nernst-Planck equation, electrochemical mobility and its relation
with diffusivity, Stokes-Einstein equation, ionic conductivity, transport CLL726 Molecular Modeling of Catalytic Reactions
number, Kohlrausch law. Charged interface: surface excess quantity, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Lippmann equation, Gouy-Chapman model, Stern layer, internal
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
and external Helmholtz layer, zeta potential, energy of double
layer. Electrokinetic phenomena: Non-equilibrium formulation, Sabatier principle. Catalytic cycle, transition state theory. Ensemble
diffusion potential, junction potential, Planck-Henderson equation, effect, defect sites, cluster size effects, metal-support interactions,
pH electrode, electrosmosis, electrophoresis, streaming potential, structural effects, quantum size effects, electron transfer effects.
sedimentation potential. Introduction to electrode kinetics: Butler- BrØnsted-Evans-Polanyi relations. Reactivity of transition-metal
Volmer formulation, Tafel equation. surfaces, quantum chemistry of chemical bond, bonding to transition
metals, chemisorption.
CLL721 Electrochemical Methods Kinetics of elementary steps (adsorption, desorption and surface
3 Credits (3-0-0) reactions). Reaction on uniform and non-uniform surfaces. Structure-
sensitive and non-sensitive reactions on metals.
Galvani Potential, Butler-Volmer Equation, Tafel Equation. Potential
Electronic structure methods, potential energy surface, Born–
Step voltammetry, pulse voltammetry, cyclic voltammetry. Controlled
Oppenheimer approximation, Hartree-Fock theory, self-consistent
current methods, current-interrupt measurements. Conductivity
field, Kohn-Sham Density Functional Theory, Bloch’s theorem and
relaxation, impedance spectroscopy. Coulometric methods, scanning
plane wave basis set, exchange-correlation functionals, pseudo-
probe techniques, spectro-electrochemistry.
potential. Search for transition state, dimer method, nudged elastic
CLL722 Electrochemical Conversion and Storage Devices band method, density of states.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Catalysis by metals, oxides, sulfides and zeolites. Aqueous phase
heterogeneous catalysis and electrocatalysis.
Electrochemical cell, fuel cells, proton exchange membrane fuel cells,
solid oxide fuel cells. Batteries, lead acid battery, Nickel-metal hydride CLL727 Heterogeneous Catalysis and Catalytic Reactors
(Ni-MH) rechargeable batteries, lithium-ion rechargeable batteries,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
liquid-redox rechargeable batteries. Electrochemical supercapacitors.
Solar cells. Electrodialysis and reverse electrodialysis. Electrochemical Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
hydrogen production and storage. Overlaps with: Basic concepts in heterogeneous catalysis, catalyst
preparation and characterization, poisoning and regeneration.
CLL723 Hydrogen Energy and Fuel Cell Technology
Industrially important catalysts and processes such as oxidation,
3 Credits (3-0-0) processing of petroleum and hydrocarbons, synthesis gas and
Overview of fuel cells: low and high temperature fuel cells. Fuel cell related processes. Commercial reactors: adiabatic and multi-tubular
thermodynamics – heat and work potentials, prediction of reversible packed beds, fluidized bed, trickle-bed, slurry reactors. Heat and
voltage, fuel cell efficiency. Fuel cell reaction kinetics – electrode mass transfer and its role in heterogeneous catalysis. Calculations
kinetics, overvoltages, exchange currents. Electrocatalysis - design, of effective diffusivity and thermal conductivity of porous catalysts.
129

Chemical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Reactor modeling. Chemistry and engineering aspects of catalytic materials: pure materials, and mixtures. A-priori probability postulate,
processes along with problems arising in industry. Catalyst ergodic hypothesis, introduction to microcanonical, canonical and
deactivation kinetics and modeling. grand canonical ensembles, derivation of physical properties for pure
components and mixtures, ideal gas and lattice gas, virial coefficient
CLL728 Biomass Conversion and Utilization
calculations. Crystal structures, solutions, modeling and analysis of
3 Credits (3-0-0) adsorption phenomena, relating them to macroscopic thermodynamics.
Pre-requisite(s): CLL122 CLL733 Industrial Multiphase Reactors
Critical analysis of issues associated with implementing large scale
3 Credits (3-0-0)
biofuel and biomass energy production. Processes for converting
feedstocks to biofuels by thermochemical methods. Biomass Pre-requisite(s): CLL122, CLL222
conversion catalysis, kinetics and reaction mechanisms, reactor design Introduction to advanced reactor analysis tools: RTD theory, RTD
and scale up issues. based models, axial dispersion, tank-in-series, multizonal models.
Hydrodynamics and flow regimes. Transport effects in multiphase
CLL729 Colloids and Aerosols reactors, interplay of length and time scales. Process parameters
3 Credits (3-0-0) of interest. Effectiveness factors in G/S and L/S systems, including
non-isothermal effects. Enhancement factor in G/L systems. Models
Pre-requisite(s): CLL231, CLL331
for non-catalytic heterogeneous reactions. Introduction to multiphase
Creeping flows around a sphere. Drag and lift forces acting on
reactors and their applications, classification of multiphase reactors,
particles in viscous fluids. Brownian motion of small particles. Colloidal
performance/operating characteristics. Mechanically agitated reactors,
interactions like van der Waal forces, electrostatic forces, depletion
bubble column/slurry bubble column reactors, fluidized bed, packed
interactions, steric hindrance. Introduction to aerosols and colloids.
bed, trickle bed reactor reactors. Limitations of models, applications
Rheology of dilute, concentrated suspensions of spherical particles.
to design of multiphase reactors for specific applications.
Dynamics of nonspherical particles in viscous fluids. Rheology of
non-spherical particles. Coagulation/coalescence due to differential CLL734 Process Intensification and Novel Reactors
settling, shear flow, Brownian diffusivity. Methods of preparation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of emulsions, high energy and low energy. Microemulsions vs
nanoemulsions. Aerosol characterization, transport of particulate Pre-requisite(s): CLL122, CLL222
matter in air via diffusion, convection and inertia, removal of particles Introduction to process intensification, possible ways of process
via dry and wet deposition. Formation of aerosol (or colloidal) particles intensification and their examples. Introduction to multifunctional
via nucleation and growth. Population balance equation. Experimental reactors/process equipment: reactive distillation, reactor-heat-
techniques for aerosol chemical characterization. exchangers. membrane reactors, micro-reactors, structured/
monolithic reactors. Intensification of conventional reactors/process
CLL730 Structure, Transport and Reactions in BioNano equipments, analysis of fluid dynamics and transport effects of
Systems intensified reactors. Order of magnitude analysis of reaction rates,
3 Credits (3-0-0) heat/mass transfer rates. Flow patterns in intensified reactors. Design
and scale of intensified reactors, fabrication issues. Examples of
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
process intensification.
Overlaps with: SBV882, MCL442
CLL735 Design of Multicomponent Separation processes
Introduction to biology: protein structure, composition, pKa and
isoelectric point. Governing equations applied to biological systems: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
conservation laws, flux equations, mathematical functions and Pre-requisite(s): CLL352
solutions, scaling and order, laminar flow. Electromechanical transport:
Overview of multi-component separation. Non-ideal solution and
biomolecular migration through blood capillaries, Poisson-Boltzmann
properties, equation of state, vapour liquid equilibrium. Multi
equation in heterogeneous media, electrical-shear stress balance in
component separation: Short cut method, rigorous calculations - sum
electrical double layers. Transport across membranes: structure and
rate, boiling point and Newton’s methods, inside-out method for
self-assembly of lipid bilayers, ligand-receptor interactions, membrane
designing of multi-component distillation, absorption and extraction
permeability, Nernst potential, adsorption isotherms and transport
column / contacting devices. Choice of column: tray, random packing
across membrane. Estimation of transport coefficients based on
and structured packing. Design of adsorption and ion exchange column.
biomolecular interactions. Research-specific case studies incorporating
Crystallization. Affinity separation and chromatographic separation.
coupled migration through reactive, electrical and heterogeneity
Optimal reflux ratio (recycle stream) - operating expenditure versus
considerations.
capital expenditure for all types of columns and contacting devices.
CLL731 Advanced Transport phenomena
CLL736 Experimental Characterization of Multiphase
3 Credits (3-0-0) Reactors
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of fluid kinematics, conservation laws and constitutive Pre-requisite(s): CLL122, CLL222
equations. Solution methods for equations of change (e.g., unsteady
Analytical techniques: Introduction to various analytical techniques
fluid flow in bounded/unbounded geometries). Creeping flow
e.g. GC, HPLC, UV Spectroscopy, TGA /DTA, FTIR, MS, GCMS, NMR,
and lubrication approximation. Surface tension driven flows and
TOC, CHONS. Principle of measurement techniques, instruments and
multiphase flows. Boundary layer theory. Unsteady heat and mass
procedures. Calibration, data processing, analysis and interpretation.
transport. Coupled transport processes-- forced convection heat and
Few working demonstrations.
mass transport in confined/unconfined flows. Multicomponent energy
Catalysis characterization: Introduction to various catalysis preparations
and mass transport. Turbulence modeling.
and characterization techniques, e.g. porosity, surface area, pore
CLL732 Advanced Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics volume and pore size distribution (using BET), XRD, SEM, TEM, NMR,
AFM, ESCA. Mossabauer spectroscopy, chemisorption, TPD / TPR.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Flow characterization: Introduction to single/multiphase flows/
Pre-requisite(s): CLL121 reactors, role of hydrodynamics. Process parameters of interest, length
First and second law of thermodynamics. Application in analysis of and time scales, instantaneous vs. time averaged characteristics.
energy and efficiency of equipment, flow through equipment. State and Introduction to various advanced intrusive and non-intrusive flow
behavior of materials, degree of freedom analysis. Material properties measurement technqiues, e.g. mininaturized pressure probes,
as a function of conditions. Relationships between material properties, gamma-ray tomography, densitometry, PIV, RPT, ECT/ERT, high speed
and changes in material properties. Equilibrium properties of photography, tracers and radiotracers.
130

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemical Engineering
CLL742 Experimental Characterization of problems leading to ODEs of initial value types. Stability and stiffness
BioMacromolecules of matrices. Solution of stiff problems like Rober’s problem in
autocatalytic reactions by Gear’s algorithm. Formulation of problems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
leading to steady state ODEs of boundary value types. Different
Pre-requisite(s): CLL141, CLL271 weighted residual methods to solve BVPs. Orthogonal collocation and
Overlaps with: MLL723 Galerkin finite element method. Application to reaction diffusion in
porous catalysts pellets under non-isothermal conditions, calculation
Theory and working principles of analytical instruments including high
of effectiveness factor. Moving boundary problems. Transient
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), ultra-high performance
problems leading to PDEs. Examples in heat and mass transfer and
liquid chromatography (UPLC), capillary electrophoresis (CE), capillary
their numerical solution: orthogonal collocation. Monte Carlo method
isoelectric focusing (cIEF), gel electrophoresis, circular dichroism
and its applications. Introduction to LBM method to solve fluid
(CD) spectroscopy, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR),
flow problems.
mass spectroscopy (MS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning
electron microscope (SEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC),
CLL766 Interfacial Engineering
ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy, surface plasmon resonance (SPR), 2D
3 Credits (3-0-0)
gel electrophoresis, fluorescence spectroscopy, Zeta-meter, contact
angle goniometer, oscillatory drop module (ODM) of goniometer, Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, CLL121
and quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). Hands-on experience on Concept and definition of interface. Physical surfaces. Surface
characterization of proteins. Case studies in biotech industry. chemistry and physics of colloids, thin films, dispersions, emulsions,
foams, polyaphrons. Interfacial processes such as crystallization,
CLL743 petrochemicals Technology epitaxy, froth flotation, adsorption, adsorptive bubble separation,
3 Credits (3-0-0) catalysis, reaction-injection moulding, microencapsulation. Industrial
aspects of interfacial engineering.
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
Composition of petroleum: laboratory tests, refinery products, CLL767 Structures and properties of polymers
characterization of crude oil. Review of petrochemicals sector
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and Indian petrochemical industries in particular. Feed stocks
for petrochemical industries and their sources. Overview of Pre-requisite(s): CLL141
refining processes: catalytic cracking, reforming, delayed coking, Overlaps with: MLL721, MLL719, TTL712
Hydrogenation and Hydrocracking, Isomerization, Alkylation and
Overview of polymer science and engineering with reference to
polymerization, purification of gases, separation of aromatics by
polymer-solution. Chain dimension: variation of chain dimension
various techniques. Petrochemicals from methane, ethane, ethylene,
with concentration, solvency etc., scaling theory. Molecular weight
acetylene, C3/C4 and higher hydrocarbons. Synthesis gas chemicals.
distribution and its effect on properties of polymer solution.
Polymers from Olefins. Synthetic fibers, rubber, plastics and synthetic
Polymer solution thermodynamics: Flory-Huggins equation and its
detergents. Energy conservation in petrochemical Industries. Pollution
development, phase separation. Polymer in good, theta and poor
control in petrochemical industries. New trends in petrochemical
solution. Colligative properties of polymer solution. Flow phenomena
industry. Planning and commissioning of a petrochemicals complex.
in polymeric liquids. Material functions for polymeric liquids.
CLL760 Crystal Engineering and Design General linear viscoelastic fluid: Rouse dynamics, Zimm dynamics.
Hyper branched polymer and its physical properties in various
3 Credits (3-0-0)
solutions. Dynamics of entangled polymers - polymer melt, chain
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, CLL121 reptation, tube model, chain length fluctuations. Convective
Fundamental aspects of crystal growth – role of controlling constraint release.
parameters; Intermolecular interaction between solution species
CLL768 Fundamentals of Computational Fluid Dynamics
and surface of crystals; Nucleation and growth mechanism, kinetics
and limitations; Spinal decomposition– mean-field and non-linear 3 Credits (2-0-2)
models; Kinetics of frontal growth; Models for 2d and 3d growth; Pre-requisite(s): CLL113, CLL110
Various analytical tools to characterize the phenomena of crystal
formation and growth – static and dynamic light scattering; Overlaps with: AML410, MEL807
scanning probe microscope, optical microscopy, time-resolved Review of basic fluid mechanics and the governing (Navier-Stokes)
techniques for crystallization kinetics; Modelling of crystallization equations. Techniques for solution of PDEs – finite difference method,
kinetics; Industrial relevance and design aspects; Real-life problems finite element method and finite volume method. Finite volume (FV)
in crystal engineering. method in one-dimension. Differencing schemes. Steady and unsteady
calculations. Boundary conditions. FV discretization in two and three
CLL761 Chemical Engineering Mathematics dimensions. SIMPLE algorithm and flow field calculations, variants
3 Credits (3-0-0) of SIMPLE. Turbulence and turbulence modeling: illustrative flow
computations. Commercial software - grid generation, flow prediction
Pre-requisite(s): MTL101, CLL110
and post-processing.
Classification, estimation and propagation of errors. Presentation of
data. Statistical methods: sample and population distributions, testing CLL769 Applications of Computational Fluid Dynamics
of hypothesis, analysis of variance. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Vector spaces, basis, matrices and differential operators. Eigen values,
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
vectors and functions. Solvability conditions for linear equations.
Frobenius method for ordinary differential equations. Sturm-Louiville Overlaps with: APL410, APL720, MCL813
Theorem: Separation of variables and Fourier transform. Green’s Introduction and review of fundamentals of CFD. Numerical
function and its applications. simulations of turbulent flows: RANS approach; Introduction to Large
Eddy Simulation (LES) and Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS).
CLL762 Advanced Computational Techniques in
Numerical simulations of multiphase flows. Two-fluid and Multi-fluid
Chemical Engineering Euler-methods; Discrete particle (Euler-Lagrange) methods; Interface
3 Credits (2-0-2) tracking/capturing methods (Volumne of Fluid Methods) (Volume of
Fluid Method). Applications of these Methods to simulate dispersed
Pre-requisite(s): CLL113
gas-liquid, gas-solid flows in bubble columns, fluidized beds, packed
Overlaps with: APL703 beds, etc. Numerical simulations of fluid flows with heat transfer.
Introduction to models in Chemical Engineering. Formulation of Numerical simulations of reactive flows.
131

Chemical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
CLL770 Introduction to Microfluidics and Microfabrication in homogeneous and heterogeneous conditions. Design of CSTR,
3 Credits (3-0-0) plug flow, batch and multistep reactors for different polymerization
reactions. Control and optimization of polymer reactors, Mathematical
Pre-requisite(s): CLL231
modeling and analysis of polymer processing units.
Overlaps with: MCL826
Microfluidics introduction, Basic principles in microfluidics, Governing CLL776 Granular Materials
equations, Basic flow solutions, Surface tension and interfacial energy, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Young-Laplace equation, Contact angle, Capillary length and capillary
Pre-requisite(s): CLL331
rise boundary conditions. Pressure-driven micro flows, Surface tension
Continuum mechanics, statistical physics and rigid body dynamics
driven flows, thin film dynamics, Gas and liquid flows, Boundary
approaches to understand microscopic and macroscopic behavior of
conditions, Low Re flows. Couette flows, Poiseuille flow, Stokes
granular materials. Constitutive modeling and rheology of granular
drag on a sphere, Two-phase flows, and Thermal transfer. Unsteady
materials. Advanced simulation techniques for particle dynamics.
Flows, Electro kinetics, Diffusion, Time-dependent flow, Capillary
Design of flow and handling systems for granular materials.
effects, Dispersion. Lab on a chip, Introduction to Microfabrication,
Materials, Clean room, Photolithography, Etching, Bulk and Surface
CLL777 Complex Fluids Technology
micromachining, Wafer bonding, Polymer micro fabrication, Template
3 Credits (3-0-0)
assisted fabrication, Application of microfluidics.
Pre-requisite(s): CLL141
CLD771 Minor project
An overview of various technologies based on complex fluids and
3 Credits (0-0-6) relate them to fundamental principles of thermodynamics and
Literature survey, Writing technical report, Planning and execution transport phenomena in complex fluids, e.g., how to manipulate
of the project work within the stipulated time frame. micro-structures and their environment to achieve new products
with desired properties. Case studies involving assembly, stability
CLL771 Introduction to Complex Fluids
and applications of colloids, emulsions, suspensions, polymer melts
3 Credits (3-0-0) and granular materials.
Overview of complex fluids: forces, energies, responses and
CLL778 Interfacial Behaviour and Transport of
timescales in complex fluids. Types of complex fluids: colloidal
dispersions, polymers, gels, liquid crystals, polymer crystals, granular Biomolecules
materials, biomolecules. Characterization of structure-property 3 Credits (3-0-0)
relationships in complex fluids. Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
CLL772 Transport phenomena in Complex Fluids Overlaps with: CYL669, SBL705, SBV885
3 Credits (3-0-0) Structure of biomacromolecules. Attributes of biomacromolecules:
size, charge, hydrophobicity. Characteristics of surface and
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
interfaces: roughness, charge, hydrophobicity. Interactions between
Classification of fluids under time dependent, time independent
biomacromolecules and interfaces: adsorption, specific binding.
and viscoelastic behaviors. Particle level responses: microstructural
Aggregation of proteins, modeling of the underlying phenomena.
origins of deformation. Linear and non-linear viscoelasticity. Transport
Elasticity of adsorbed macro-molecules at interfaces. Equilibrium
processes in a variety of self-assembling fluids, including surfactant
and transient description of transport of biomolecules through intra-
micelles, nano-emulsions, gels, liquid crystalline polymers. Dynamics
and extracellular space. Governing equations applied to biological
of rod-like polymers. Static and viscoelastic properties of interfaces.
systems: conservation laws, flux equations, Fickian and non-Fickian
Rheometry and constitutive modeling. Heat transfer in complex fluids:
diffusion, diffusion with reaction/ binding, electrochemical transport.
boundary layers. Mixing equipment and its selection.
Constitutive laws and solution methods applied to biological systems.
CLL773 Thermodynamics of Complex Fluids Adsorption isotherms and transport across membrane.
3 Credits (3-0-0) CLL779 Molecular Biotechnology and in-vitro Diagnostics
Pre-requisite(s): CLL121 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: PYL202 Introduction to the cellular structure and function of biomolecules,
Intermolecular forces. Statistical mechanical approach to theory and experimental characterization of commonly-used
thermodynamic potentials. Characterization of free energy curves. laboratory techniques in molecular diagnostic protocols. Identification
Entropically driven phase separation, nucleation and spontaneous of the important parameters such as sensitivity, specificity, LOD etc.
phase separations in complex fluids. Characterization of structures: in the design of a quality system for molecular analyses. Highly
Minkowski functionals. Phase separation in confinement. Mean field sensitive reporter technologies and applications, technologies
theories for phase transition, their break-down, introduction to field providing highly dense and bioactive solid phases, novel bioaffinity
theory. Thermodynamics of colloidal systems and polymers. binders, heterogeneous and homogenous assay concepts, and
multiplexed bioassays.
CLL774 Simulation Techniques for Complex Fluids
CLL780 Bioprocessing and Bioseparations
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL113
Pre-requisite(s): CLL271
Overlaps with: MCL315
Overlaps with: BEL703, BEL820
Simulation techniques: Molecular Dynamics, Brownian Dynamics,
Introduction to the different unit operations utilized in production
Monte-Carlo, Discrete Element Method and Lattice Boltzmann
of biotech drugs in the areas of upstream processing, harvest, and
Simulations. Force fields and interactions. Statistical measures and
downstream processing. Introduction to analytical methods used for
trajectory analysis to determine structure (e.g., radial distribution
characterization of biotech products and processes (high performance
function) and properties (e.g., self-diffusivity, shear-dependent
liquid chromatography, mass spectrophotometry, capillary
viscosity) of complex fluids.
electrophoresis, near infrared spectroscopy,UV spectroscopy).
CLL775 polymerization process Modeling Optimization of biotech processes - unit operation specific optimization
3 Credits (3-0-0) vs. process optimization, process intensification, statistical data
analysis. Scale-up of different unit operations utilized in bioprocessing:
Pre-requisite(s): CLL122
procedures, issues that frequently occur and possible solutions.
Overlaps with: PTL719 Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP): need, principles and
Modeling of step-growth, chain-growth and non-linear polymerization key practical issues. Process validation: basics, planning and
132

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemical Engineering
implementation. Industrial case studies in bioprocessing. Current strategies of differential evolution. Memetic algorithms. Scatter,
topics in bioprocessing and bioseparations: Quality by Design and Tabu search. Ant-colony optimization. Particle swarm optimization.
Process Analytical Technology. Self-organizing migrating algorithm. Neural networks. Quantum
computing. DNA computing. Multi-objective optimization. Industrial
CLD781 Major project part-I
applications.
8 Credits (0-0-16)
Literature survey, Writing technical report, Planning and execution CLL786 Fine Chemicals Technology
of the project work within the stipulated time frame. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
CLL781 process Operations Scheduling
Introduction to fine and high value chemicals. Historical
3 Credits (3-0-0)
perspectives. Synthesis methods from chemical (petrochemicals and
Introduction to enterprise-wide supply-chain optimization. Decision
natural products) and biotechnology routes (enzymatic methods,
making for planning and scheduling. Classification of scheduling
fermentation and cell culture technology). Extraction of fine
formulations: various storage policies, network representations,
chemicals from microorganisms, plant sources and animal sources.
time representations. Short-term scheduling of batch processes:
Chromatographic separations. Reactor technology for fine chemicals.
discrete-time and continuous-time based models. Cyclic and short-
Scale-up and scale-out of reactors. Microreactor technology and
term scheduling of continuous processes. Solution of resulting models
process intensification. Novel high value chemicals for adhesives,
with industrial applications using GAMS modeling language.
electronic materials, food additives, specialty polymers, flavours
CLD782 Major project part-II and fragrances.
12 Credits (0-0-24)
CLL787 Statistical Methods for Chemical Engineering
Pre-requisite(s): CLD781 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Formulation of the problem, literature survey, design and fabrication Revisit of probability and random variables (rv), expectation operator,
of the experimental setup, study of experimental techniques in the moments of distributions; Discrete rv and probability distributions:
case of experimental projects, formulation of equations and analytical/ Bernoulli, Poisson, Geometric and Multinomial distributions;
numerical solution in case of modeling projects, development of Continuous rv and distributions: Gaussian, Student's- t, Chi Squared,
software, analysis and interpretation of results, writing technical F; Central limit theorem, Estimation: Unbiased estimator, Variance,
report, presentation of results and scientific reporting in form or standard error and mean square error of the estimator; Method
thesis and presentation. of point estimation: Method of moments, maximum likelihood and
Bayesian estimation; Interval estimation: Chebyshev’s inequality;
CLL782 process Optimization
Multivariate Gaussian distribution; Multivariate hypothesis testing:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
testing of mean with variance known and unknownone and two sample
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222, CLL352 cases and their confidence intervals, Tests on population proportion,
Overlaps with: MTL103, MTL625, MTL704, APL771, MCL742 paired t- tests, type II error; Simple and multiple linear regression,
significance of regression, confidence interval for parameters,
Introduction to optimization and applications; classification (LP, NLP,
confidence interval for mean response and prediction interval for
MILP, MINLP), convexity, unimodal vs multimodal. Single variable
future observation, properties of least square estimators-Gauss-
and multivariable unconstrained optimization methods. Linear
Markov theorem, Model adequacy test-residual analysis, normality test
programming, branch and bound method for MILP. Constrained
and correlation coefficient, influential observations, Other regression
optimization: nonlinear programming. Necessary and sufficient
models: polynomial regression, weighted least squares regression,
conditions of optimality. Quadratic programming. Case studies from
total least squares regression, stepwise Regression, robust regression,
chemical industry.
ridge, quantile regression, least angle regression, lasso regression,
CLL783 Advanced process Control elastic net regression, concept of regularization, multicollinearity;
3 Credits (3-0-0) Application of process examples- Tennessee-Eastman process case
study; Gross errors and random errors, Statistical basis of data
Pre-requisite(s): CLL261
reconciliation, data reconciliation of linear systems with all variables
Overlaps with: ELL325, ELL723, BBL444 measured, with measured and unmeasured variables, Concept of
State-space models. Distributed parameter models. Feedforward redundancy and observability of process variables using graphs,
control. Ratio control. Dead-time compensation. Relative gain array. estimation of measurement covariance, bilinear data reconciliation
Z-transforms and digital control. Internal model control. State problems-Crowe’s method, Simpson’s method, process examples-
estimation and process identification. Adaptive control. Non-linear binary distillation column, splitter, mixer, separator; Linear dynamic
control. Model-based control structures. Synthesis of control systems data reconciliation: Optimal state estimation using Kalman filter;
with case studies. Intelligent control, model predictive control. Glimpse of nonlinear data reconciliation process; Introduction to
gross error detection; Statistical tests for gross error detection: global
CLL784 process Modeling and Simulation
test, measurement test, nodal test, generalized likelihood ratio test,
3 Credits (3-0-0) principal component tests, type I and type II errors; detectability and
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222, CLL352 identifiability of gross errors; Application of process examples- mass
Introduction to modeling, physical and mathematical models, flow networks; Introduction to software packages: MATLAB and
modeling individual units vs. process. Role of simulation and R; Process applications and case studies: Continuous Stirred Tank
simulators. Sequential and modular approaches to flowsheet Reactor example, process flow networks and Tennessee-Eastman
simulation: equation solving approach. Decomposition of networks: process case study.
tearing algorithms, convergence promotion.
CLL788 process Data Analytics
Specific purpose simulation. Dynamic simulation. Case studies using
3 Credits (3-0-0)
commercial or open source simulation packages.
Process data pre-processing and handling: data visualization and
CLL785 Evolutionary Optimization transformation; quick revisit to regression modeling. Dimensionality
3 Credits (3-0-0) reduction and latent variable models with applications to fault
detection and inferential modeling of processes: Principal Component
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222
Analysis (PCA), factor analysis, canonical correlation analysis, partial
Overlaps with: MTL720 least squares; Classification and clustering methods with applications
Traditional vs. nontraditional optimization techniques. Population to process mode diagnosis: k-nearest neighbor, naive Bayes, linear
based search algorithms. Evolutionary strategies. Simulated discriminants, support vector machines, decision trees and forests,
annealing. Genetic algorithms. Differential evolution. Different k-means, fuzzy c-means, possibilistic c-means, hierarchical clustering
133

Chemical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
methods, mixture models; Nonlinear approaches: Kernel methods- estimation, hypothesis testing, linear regression, analysis of
kernel PCA, kernel SVM, neural nets-feed forward networks, Gaussian variance, types of data plots. Technology transfer of processes
process; Entropy and its applications to redundant variable isolation: - need of technology transfer, key attributes, key challenges,
Shannon entropy, cross entropy, joint and conditional entropy, solutions to various issues. Intellectual property management
KL-divergence, mutual information;Model learning approaches: - intellectual property rights, IPR laws, patents, trademarks,
Maximum likelihood, maximum a posteriori, Bayesian approaches; designs, copyrights, licensing, IP management. Commercialization
Expectation-Maximization, back propagation, ensemble learning; of technologies - invention, product development, technical
Model assessment and validation: BIC, kfold cross validation, model and market feasibility analysis, intellectual property acquisition.
averaging; Switching process systems modeling: Markov models,
hidden Markov models (HMM); Estimation and inference of dynamical CLL793 Membrane Science and Engineering
systems: Kalman filter and smoother, particle filters; Introduction to 3 Credits (3-0-0)
software packages: PYTHON, MATLAB and R; Process applications
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, CLL252
and case studies: Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor example and
Tennessee-Eastman process case study. Introduction to membrane separation processes, their classification,
and applications. General transport theories including theory of
CLL789 Applied Time Series Analysis for Chemical irreversible thermodynamics for multicomponent systems. Membrane
Engineering preparation techniques. Design and analysis and industrial application
of various membrane processes such as reverse osmosis, ultra
3 Credits (3-0-0)
filtration, electrodialysis, dialysis, liquid membrane separation, gas
Overlaps with: ELL319, ELL720 permeation and pervaporation.
Models for Discrete-Time Linear Time Invariant (LTI) Systems: Models
for Discrete-Time LTI Systems, LTI system in frequency domain, CLL794 Petroleum Refinery Engineering
Sampling and discretization of of process data, Time domain analysis 3 Credits (3-0-0)
of process data, A quick introduction into time series modelling of
Pre-requisite(s): CLL222, CLL352
process data; LTI system in frequency domain: Frequency response
function; Z-transforms, initial final value theorems, Properties of Composition of petroleum, laboratory tests, refinery products,
z-Transforms, Transfer function and its properties, Empirical transfer characterization of crude oil. Design of crude oil distillation column.
function; Sampling and discretization of of process data: Approximate Catalytic cracking, catalytic reforming, delayed coking, furnace
and exact discretization, Zero order hold, Single rate vs. Multi-rate design, hydrogenation and hydrocracking, isomerization, alkylation
systems, State space approach for discretization, Sampling and and polymerization. Lube oil manufacturing. Energy conservation in
reconstruction, Sampling theorem; Time domain analysis of process petroleum refineries. New trends in petroleum refinery operations.
data: Auto covariance function, Auto correlation function, White Pyrolysis of naphtha and light hydrocarbons.
noise process, Cross covariance function, Partial auto correlation
CLV796 Current Topics in Chemical Engineering
function, Partial cross correlation function, A quick introduction into
time series modelling of process data: Auto Regressive, Moving 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Average, Auto Regressive Exogeneous family, Auto Regressive Moving As per declaration of instructor(s).
Average Exogeneous family, Box-Jenkins, Output-error models;
CLV797 Recent Advances in Chemical Engineering
Frequency domain analysis of process data: Fourier Analysis and
Spectral Analysis: Fourier series, Power spectrum, Discrete time 2 Credits (2-0-0)
Fourier transform, Discrete Fourier transform, Spectrum, spectral
Pre-requisite(s): To be declared by Instructor
density and spectral envelope; Introduction to estimation and
inference of linear process dynamical systems with Gaussian noise: As per declaration of instructor(s).
Kalman filter; Introduction to estimation and inference of nonlinear
CLL798 Selected Topics in Chemical Engineering-I
process dynamical systems with Gaussian noise: Extended Kalman
3 Credits (3-0-0)
filter, Unscented Kalman filer, Ensemble Kalman filter; Introduction
to estimation and inference of nonlinear process dynamical systems Pre-requisite(s): To be declared by Instructor
with non-Gaussian noise: Particle filter; Process applications and case As per declaration of instructor(s).
studies: Continuous Stirred Tank Reactor example, Quadruple tank
system and Tennessee-Eastman process case study. Signal processing CLL799 Selected Topics in Chemical Engineering-II
toolbox and system identification toolbox in MATLAB. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
CLL791 Chemical product and process Integration Pre-requisite(s): To be declared by Instructor
3 Credits (3-0-0) As per declaration of instructor(s).
Pre-requisite(s): CLL371 CLD880 Minor project
The course will be a structured project based course with initial 4 Credits (0-0-8)
exposure to industrial processes of understanding Voice of Customers,
identifying design specifications, scoping the technology and product CLD881 Major project part-I
landscape and deciding on the technology strategy. Technical and 8 Credits (0-0-16)
economic feasibility analysis as well as scale-up and manufacturing
concerns will also be discussed. Each group will identify a specific product CLD882 Major project part-II
or process of interest and work through these considerations as well as 12 Credits (0-0-24)
integrate thermodynamics, transport principles, fluid mechanics and
reactor design understanding to design the product or process chosen. Pre-requisite(s): CLD881
Formulation of the problem, literature survey, design and
CLL792 Chemical product Development and fabrication of the experimental setup, study of experimental
Commercialization techniques in the case of experimental projects, formulation of
3 Credits (3-0-0) equations and analytical/numerical solution in case of modeling
projects, development of software, analysis and interpretation
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110
of results, writing technical report, presentation of results
Overlaps with: MTL766, MAL719, SML802 and scientific reporting in form or thesis and presentation.
Design of experiments - factors, responses, main effects,
CLD895 MS Research project
interactions, different kinds of designs - screening vs. high
resolution. Statistical data analysis - applied probability, sampling, 36 Credits (0-0-72)
134

Department of Chemistry
CML101 Introduction to Chemistry CML512 Stereochemistry & Organic Reaction
4 Credits (3-1-0) Mechanisms
Basics of rate laws; Complex reactions: consecutive and parallel 3 Credits (3-0-0)
reactions; Temperature dependence of reaction rates; Reaction Stereochemistry of acyclic and cyclic compounds including chiral
mechanisms: steady-state approximation, pre-equilibria, unimolecular molecules without a chiral centre, Reaction mechanisms (polar
reactions; Catalysis; Atomic structure: Schrödinger equation, the and free radical) with stereochemical considerations, Reactive
hydrogen atom; The chemical bond: simplest molecules H+ and intermediates: generation, structure, and reactivity.
2
H; Vibration of diatomics: harmonic oscillator and Morse potential
2
Stability of organometallic compounds; Metal carbonyls: structure CML513 photochemistry & pericyclic Reactions
and bonding; Important reactions of organometallic compounds; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Homogeneous catalysis; Applications of crystal field theory;
Pericyclic reaction, Introduction and classification, Theory of
An overview of metals in biology; Functions of metalloproteins
pericyclic reactions: correlation diagrams, FMO, and PMO methods,
R/S-Nomenclature; Projection formulas; MO approaches for the
Cycloadditions reactions, Molecular rearrangements (pericyclic and
stereochemical outcome of the reactions; Determination of reaction
non-pericyclic), Photochemistry: basics and mechanistic principles,
mechanism; Kinetic versus thermodynamic control of the reaction;
Photochemical rearrangements, Reactivity of simple chromophores.
Trapping of reactive intermediates; Spectroscopic methods of
structure determination. CML514 Main Group Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CMp100 Chemistry Laboratory
General properties of p block elements, bonding, historical landmarks,
2 Credits (0-0-4)
and periodic properties, Introduction to group theory, Chemistry of
Experiments involve the following: Titrations, Surface Tension alkali and alkaline earth metals, Chemistry of group 13, 14, 15, and
and Viscosity, Potentiometery, Conductometry, Preparation of 16 elements, Halogen chemistry, Chemistry of rare gases.
metal complexes and important organic compounds, Kinetics,
Chromatography, Qualitative and quantitative estimation of organic CML515 Instrumental Methods of Analysis
compounds.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Measurement basics and data analysis, Introduction to spectrometric
CML102 Chemical Synthesis of Functional Materials
methods and components of optical instruments, Atomic
3 Credits (3-0-0) absorption, fluorescence, emission, mass, and X-ray spectrometry,
Chemical approaches to the synthesis of functional materials – the Introduction to and applications of uv-vis molecular absorption,
design of materials targeting important properties by ‘bottom-up’ luminescence, infrared, Raman, nuclear magnetic resonance, and
processes that manipulate primary chemical bonds. mass spectroscopy/ spectrometry, Introduction to electroanalytical
Fundamental chemistry principles involved in materials design through methods: potentiometry, coulometry, and voltammetry, Introduction
synthesis – process methodologies such as self-assembly, sol-gel to chromatographic separation: gas, high-performance liquid,
reactions, synthesis of nanomaterials, etc. supercritical fluid, and capillary electrophoresis chromatography,
Introduction to thermal methods of analysis.
CML103 Applied Chemistry - Chemistry at Interfaces
CML521 Molecular Thermodynamics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Unit processses in organic synthesis. Laboratory vs. industrial
Basics concepts, Review of first, second, and third laws of
synthesis. Role of medium in directing synthetic outcomes, organized
thermodynamics, Gibb’s free energy, Extra work, Chemical potential,
media. Natural and synthetic constrained systems (inorganic and
Ideal and non ideal solution, Phase rule, Phase diagram, Solutions,
organic) for control of reactivity in organic reactions. Phase transfer
Chemical equilibrium, Postulates of statistical thermodynamics,
catalysts, polymer and supported reagents for control of reactions.
Ensembles, Monoatomic and polyatomic ideal gases, Molar heat
Green Chemistry. Heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis, surface
capacities, Classical statistical mechanics.
chemistry, kinetics of catalyzed reactions. Industrial catalysis.
CMp521 Laboratory-III
CML511 Quantum Chemistry
2 Credits (0-0-4)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Basic laboratory techniques to synthesize, purify, and characterize
Basic concepts and postulates of quantum mechanics, Hydrogen
small organic molecules by analytical and spectroscopic methods.
atom, Quantization of angular momentum, Many electron atoms,
Variation theorem, Perturbation theory, Molecular orbital and valence
CMp522 Laboratory-IV
bond theories, Introductory treatment of semi-empirical and ab initio
2 Credits (0-0-4)
calculations on molecular systems, Density functional theory.
Determination of enzyme activity in biological samples, Protein
CMp511 Laboratory-I purification and characterization, Microbial growth experiments, DNA
and RNA isolation, Gel electrophoresis.
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Experiments highlighting the principles of thermodynamics CML522 Chemical Dynamics & Surface Chemistry
and chemical equilibrium, electrochemistry, chemical kinetics,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
spectroscopy, and computer simulations. Examples include:
Thermodynamics of micellization, Synthesis, stabilization, and Kinetics of simple and complex reactions, Transport properties,
spectroscopy of nanoparticles, Steady-state and time resolved Theories of reaction rates and dynamics of gas and liquid phase
fluorescence, Cyclic and linear sweep voltammetry, Electronic reactions, Experimental techniques to study fast reactions,
structure calculations, etc. Photochemical reactions, Surface phenomena and physical methods
for studying surfaces, Heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis.
CMp512 Laboratory-II
2 Credits (0-0-4) CML523 Organic Synthesis
Selected experiments to develop the synthetic, purification, and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
analytical/characterization skills in different areas of inorganic Formation of carbon-carbon bonds including organometallic reactions,
chemistry, such as, coordination, organometallic, bioinorganic Synthetic applications of organoboranes and organosilanes, Reactions
chemistry, and so forth. at unactivated C-H bonds, Oxidations, Reductions, Newer Reagents,
135

Chemistry Courses of Study 2024-2025
Design of organic synthesis, Retrosynthetic analysis, Selectivity in CML663 Selected Topics in Spectroscopy
organic synthesis, Protection and deprotection of functional groups, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Multistep synthesis of some representative molecules.
Franck-Condon principle, Fermi Golden rule, Normal mode analysis,
CML524 Transition and Inner Transition Metal Chemistry Multi-photon spectroscopy, Molecular beam techniques, Non-linear
laser spectroscopy, Two-level systems, Precession, Rabi frequency,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Nutation, Block equations, Multi-dimensional NMR techniques.
Introduction to coordination chemistry, Crystal field theory, Ligand
field theory, Molecular orbital theory, Magnetic and spectral CML664 Group Theory & Spectroscopy
characteristics of inner transition metal complexes, Substitution,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Electron transfer and photochemical reactions of transition metal
Symmetry operations, Review of point and space groups, Applications
complexes, Physical, spectroscopic, and electrochemical methods
of group theoretical techniques in spectroscopy, Chemical bonding,
used in the study of transition metal complexes, Metal-metal
Crystallography, Theoretical treatment of rotational, vibrational, and
bonded compounds and transition metal cluster compounds, Uses
electronic spectroscopy, Magnetic spectroscopy.
of lanthanide complexes: as shift reagents, as strong magnets, and
in fluorescence, Bioinorganic chemistry: introduction, Bioinorganic
CML665 Biophysical Chemistry
chemistry of iron: hemoglobin, myoglobin, cytochromes, Bioinorganic
chemistry of zinc, cobalt, and copper. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Structure and conformations of proteins, nucleic acids and other
CML525 Basic Organometalic Chemistry biological polymers, Techniques for the study of biological structure
3 Credits (3-0-0) and function, Configurational statistics and conformational transitions,
Organometallic chemistry of main group, transition, and inner Thermodynamics and kinetics of ligand interactions, Regulation of
transition metals. Synthesis and applications of BuLi, Grignard, biological activity, Bioinformatics: Genomics and proteomics.
organoaluminum, and organozinc reagents, 18 electron rule, Metal
CML671 Supramolecular Chemistry
carbonyls: bonding and infrared spectra, phosphines and NHC’s,
Alkenes and alkynes, carbenes and carbynes (Fisher and Schrock), 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Hapto ligands with hapticity from 2-8, Oxidative addition and reductive Non-covalent associations, Molecular recognition, Design and
elimination, 1,1 and 1,2-migratory insertions and beta hydrogen applications of molecular hosts: crown compounds, cyclophanes,
elimination, Mechanism of substitution reactions, Fluxionality and cyclodextrins, etc., Nano technology, Molecular clefts, tweezers, and
hapticity change, Organometallic clusters, C-H activation: agostic devices, Self assembly and replication.
and anagostic interactions, Homogeneous catalysis: hydrogenation,
hydroformylation, methanol to acetic acid processes, and Wacker CML672 Recent Trends in Organic Chemistry
oxidation, Introduction to cross coupling and olefin metathesis 3 Credits (3-0-0)
reactions, Olefin oligomerization and polymerization.
Recent advances in organic synthesis, spectroscopy, and reaction
CML526 Structure & Function of Cellular Biomolecules mechanisms.
3 Credits (3-0-0) CML673 Bio-organic and Medicinal Chemistry
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, Structure and function of proteins, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and lipids. Biological membranes,
Bio-organic: Amino acids, polypeptides, and enzyme models, Medicinal:
Enzymes: classification, kinetics, mechanism, and applications. Basic
definitions and classifications, Pharmaceutical, pharmacokinetic, and
concepts of microbial culture, growth, and physiology.
pharmacodynamic phases, Drug-receptor interactions, Intra- and
CMD631 project part-I intermolecular forces, Solvent effects, Ligand binding, Docking and
design, Drug metabolism.
6 Credits (0-0-12)
CML674 physical Methods of Structure Determination
CML631 Molecular Biochemistry of Organic Compounds
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Central dogma, DNA replication and repair, Transcription, Translation, Applications of UV, IR, NMR, and mass spectral methods in structure
Recombinant DNA technology, Basic concept of metabolism: determination of organic compounds.
glycolysis, TCA cycle, ß-oxidation, Amino acid transamination and
urea cycle. CML675/CML740 Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CMD641 project part-II
Chemistry of heterocyclic compounds containing one, two, and three
10 Credits (0-0-20)
heteroatoms, Total synthesis of representative natural products.
CML661 Solid State Chemistry CML681 physical Methods in Inorganic Chemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Crystal chemistry, Bonding in solids, Defects and non-stoichiometry, Use of NMR spectroscopy for structural elucidation of simple inorganic
A range of synthetic and analytical techniques to prepare and and organometallic compounds using chemical shifts and hetero-
characterize solids, Electronic, magnetic, and superconducting nuclear coupling constants, Relaxation phenomena in inorganic
properties, Optical properties which include: luminescence and lasers, compounds, Double resonance technique and its applications, EPR
nanostructures and low dimensional properties, etc. spectroscopy for the identification of inorganic radicals, Introduction
to Mossbauer spectroscopy, Factors influencing chemical shifts and
CML662 Statistical Mechanics & Molecular Simulation quadrupolar splitting, Structural information: X-ray diffraction methods
Methods (powder and single crystal), Finger printing of solids from powder
3 Credits (3-0-0) data and determination of crystal structures by Rietveld analysis and
single crystal studies.
Micro- and macroscopic state of a classical system, Phase space,
Ergodicity and mixing in phase space, Theory of ensembles, Classical
CML682 Inorganic polymers
fluids, Phase transitions and relaxation phenomena, Monte Carlo,
molecular dynamics, and Brownian dynamics, Computer simulations, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Brownian motion, Langevin equation, Elucidation of structural, dynamic, Homo and heterocatenated inorganic polymers: general introduction,
and thermodynamic properties of complex fluids and soft matter. Polyphosphazenes: synthetic routes and bonding features,
136

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemistry
Polymerization of organo/organometallic substituted phosphazenes of enzymes in diagnostics, analysis, biosensors, and other industrial
and their applications, Polysilanes: synthesis and characterization processes and bio-transformations, Enzyme structure determination,
of polysilanes, unique electronic and optical properties and stability, and stabilisation, Enzyme immobilization and concept of
its applications, Polysiloxanes: precursors used in synthesis of enzyme engineering, Nanobiocatalysis.
polysiloxanes via anionic and cationic polymerization methods,
properties and environmental aspects, Polysiloles and their comparison CML696 physical Organic Chemistry
with polythiophenes, Introduction to organometallic polymers:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
synthesis of poly(ferrocenylsilane)s and their applications. Catalytic
methods for homo and hetero-catenated polymers, Characterization Overlap with: CML743
methods (spectroscopy, gel permeation chromatography, differential Introduction to Molecular Orbital theory, frontier Orbitals and orbital
scanning calorimetry) mixing; Details of Reactive intermediates; Correlation between the
perturbations to a chemical bond and potential energy; Simple rate
CML683 Applied Organometallic Chemistry laws; Arrhenius equation and Eyring equation, Transition State theory.
Kinetics vs Thermodynamic control; Experimental investigation of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
reaction mechanisms and short lived intermediates; The kinetic
Introduction to homogeneous catalysis, TON and TOF, Some aspects Isotope Effect; Reaction trajectories: Cross-over experiments;
of commonly used ligands in homogeneous catalysis, such as, CO, Characterisation of short lived intermediates; Examples of reactive
amines, phosphines, NHC’s, alkenes, alkynes, carbenes, carbynes, species and their behavior Supramolecular chemistry. Electron transfer
etc., Recent developments in hydrogenation and hydroformylation reactions. Organic photochemical transformation (including catalysis).
and their asymmetric variations using OM catalysts, Wacker oxidation,
Monsanto and Cativa processes, Olefin and alkyne trimerization CML670 Organic Chemistry of Biological Systems
and oligomerization, Olefin polymerization using Ziegler-Natta,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Titanium group metallocenes, Post metallocene late TM catalysts
and FI catalysts, Olefin and alkyne metathesis, Grubbs I, II, and Pre-requisite(s): CML526
III, Schrock, and Schrock-Hoveyda catalysts, Types of metathesis Basic principles of chemical biology illustrated by detailed case
such as RCM, ROM, ROMP, ADMET, and EM. Applications in industry, studies for principal mechanistic categories of reaction: structure
Palladium and nickel catalyzed cross coupling reactions such as and reactivity; chemical mechanism of enzyme catalysis; chemistry
Suzuki, Heck, Sonogashira, Stille, Negishi, Hiyama, Buchwald- of signaling, biosynthesis, and polyketides, Organic chemistry
Hartwig, decarboxylative cross coupling, and alpha arylation of of biological pathways such as Kreb’s cycle, lipid and amino acid
carbonyls, Fischer Tropsch Process, C-H activation of alkyls and biosynthesis, Chemical methods to synthesize DNA and RNA, solid
aryls using transition metal complexes, Organometallic polymers, phase synthesis of peptides, Macromolecule synthesis, Combinatorial
Bio-organometallic chemistry: Vitamin B-12, Planar chirality of chemistry, Chemical ligation, bioorthogonal reaction; chemical
metal sandwich compounds and their applications in industry (e.g. genetics and small-molecule inhibitor such as phosphorylation, and
Josiphos catalyst), Ferrocene based drugs, Sustainable catalysis for lipidation. Types of biological assays and their informational content.
pharmaceuticals and industry using organometallics. Chemical methods to synthesize proteins and peptides, Foldamer
ligand for a medicinally relevant target, protein-protein interaction,
CML684 Bio-Inorganic Chemistry Ligands for protein surfaces, small molecule arrays.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CML721 Design and Synthesis of Organic Molecules
Introduction of bio-inorganic chemistry, General properties of
biological molecules, Physical methods in bio-inorganic chemistry, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Binding of metal ions and complexes to biomolecule active centers, Selectivity in organic synthesis: chemo-, regio-, stereo- and
Synthesis and reactivity of active sites, Atom and group transfer enantioselectivity. Target-oriented synthesis: Designing organic
chemistry, Electron transfer in proteins, Frontiers of bio-inorganic synthesis, Retrosynthetic analysis, disconnetion approach, linear
chemistry: some topics of current research interest. and convergent synthesis. Diversity-oriented synthesis: concept of
forward-synthetic analysis, appendage diversity, skeletal diversity,
CML691 Microbial Biochemistry stereochemical diversity, complexity and diversity. Asymmetric
Synthesis: Use of chiral catalysts, organocatalysis, chiron approach
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and N-heterocyclic carbenes. Principles and use of enzymes in the
Microscopic examination of microorganisms, classification, syntheis of industrially important sugar / fatty acid esters, sugar
morphology and fine structure of microbial cells, cultivation, nucleotide derivatives; enantiomeric pure compounds and biobased
reproduction and growth, pure culture techniques, Basic microbial platform chemicals.
metabolisms, Concepts of their genetics: transformation, transduction,
and conjugation, Important microorganisms and enzymes.
CMp722 Synthesis of Organic and Inorganic Compounds
3 Credits (0-0-6)
CML692 Food Chemistry and Biochemistry
Single, double and multi-stage preparation of organic, inorganic
3 Credits (3-0-0) and organometallic compounds; experiments involving the concepts
Carbohydrates: structure and functional properties of mono-oligo- of protecting groups and selectivity; identification of compounds
polysaccharides including starch, cellulose, pectic substances, and through thin-layer chromatography and their purification by column
dietary fibers, Essential amino acids, proteins, and lipids in food and chromatography. Characterization of synthesized compounds using
their impact on functional properties, vitamins and minerals, Food IR, UV, 1H-NMR and mass spectromteric techniques.
flavours: terpenes, esters, ketones, and quinines; Food additives,
Bioactive constituents in food: isoflavones, phenol, and glycosides;
CML723 principles and practice of NMR and Optical
Enzymes: enzymatic and non-enzymatic browning, enzymes in food
Spectroscopy
processing, oxidative enzymes, Food biochemistry: balanced diet,
PER, anti-nutrients and toxins, nutrition deficiency diseases. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fundamentals of FT NMR spectroscopy, relation between structure
and NMR properties, one-dimensional spectroscopy (1H, 13C,
CML693/ CML739 Applied Biocatalysis
DEPT, steady state NOE, saturation transfer) and an introduction to
3 Credits (3-0-0) two-dimensional NMR (COSY, NOESY, and HSQC) and their use in
Introduction to enzymes and enzyme catalysed reactions, Classification structure elucidation. Principles and analytical applications of optical
and mechanism of reaction, Purification and characterization of spectroscopic methods including atomic absorption and emission,
enzymes, Michelis Menten kinetics, Industrial enzymes, Applications UV-Visible, IR absorption, scattering, and luminescence.
137

Chemistry Courses of Study 2024-2025
CML724 Synthesis of Industrially Important Inorganic fabrication: chemical routes, self assembly methods, biomimetic
Materials and electrochemical approaches; Size controls properties (optical,
electronic and magnetic properties of materials) - Applications (carbon
3 Credits (3-0-0)
nanotubes and nanoporous zeolites; Quantum Dots, basic ideas of
Modern methods applied in the synthesis of inorganic, organometallic
nanodevices).
and polymer materials. Handling of air and moisture sensitive
compounds, dry box, glove bag, Schlenk line and vacuum line
techniques. Methods of purification of and handling of reactive CML735 Biosynthetic Approach Towards Natural
industrial gases. Methods of purification of inorganic compounds and products
crystallization of solids for X-ray analysis. General strategies, brief
3 Credits (3-0-0)
outline of theory and methodology used for the synthesis of inorganic/
Secondary Metabolism (The building blocks and construction
organometallic molecules to materials including macromolecules.
mechanisms), Acetate pathway (Fatty acids and Polyketides).
Emphasis will be placed how to adopt appropriate synthetic routes to
control shape and size of the final product, ranging from amorphous
materials, porous solids, thin films, large single crystals, and special CML737 Applied Spectroscopy
forms of nanomaterials. A few examples of detailed synthesis will be 3 Credits (3-0-0)
highlighted in each category of materials.
Applications of advanced 1D-NMR techniques such as nOe, 1D
13C-NMR (including APT and DEPT) techniques, multinuclear
CML726 Cheminformatics and Molecular Modelling NMR spectroscopy, 2D NMR techniques (COSY, HETCOR, HSQC,
3 Credits (3-0-0) HMBC, NOESY, ROESY etc.) for the structural and stereochemical
determination of organic compounds. Introduction to various types
Chemistry & Information technology, chemical / biochemical data
of ionizations (such as EI, CI, MALDI, field ionization/desorption,
collation, retrieval, analysis & interpretation, hypothesis generation
electrospray ionization) and analyzers (such as quadrupole, time of
& validation, development of structure activity/property relationships,
flight, triple quadupole, QqTOF, ion-trap) in mass spectrometry for MS,
artificial intelligence techniques in chemistry. Building molecules on a
MS/MS and MSn applications. Determination of peptide sequencing
computer, quantum and molecular mechanics methods for geometry
using mass spectrometric techniques.
optimization, Simulation methods for molecules and materials.
CML738 Applications of p-block Elements and their
CMp728 Instrumentation Laboratory
Compounds
3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Experiments based on Instrumental methods of chemical analysis
Introduction, Structure, bonding and recent discussions on d orbital
involving spectroscopy, microscopy and thermal methods.
participation. Boranes, carboranes and metallaboranes and their use
in BNCT and as control rods in nuclear reactors, modern electron
CML729 Material Characterization
counting methods such as Jemmis rules, chemistry of B(0) and B(1).
3 Credits (3-0-0) GaAs, GaN, InSnO3: Synthesis and applications in solar cells, LED
Compositional analysis of solid materials by X-ray and electron and as transparent conducting materials. Fullerenes, nanotubes,
microscopic techniques. Basic concepts of diffraction techniques graphene, silicates, aluminosilicates, zeolites and their applications.
(powder and single crystal) in elucidating the crystal structures Silicones and their industrial applications. Si(II) and Ge(II) chemistry.
organic, inorganic and hybrid materials. Applications of electron NHC’s and their use in stabilizing main group compounds. Nitrogen
microscopic techniques (scanning and transmission) for morphological based fertilizers, Ammonia, Haber-Bosch Process, nitrogen based
and nanostructural features. Thermal analytical methods for explosives, hydrazines as rockel fuels, applications of azides and
correlating structural information and monitoring phase transition. pentazenium. Phosphorus based fertilizer processes, phosphorus
Emphasis will be placed on the above techniques for industrially based pesticides, phosphorus-nitrogen compounds as multidentate
important materials and the interpretation and evaluation of the ligands, superbases, dendrimer cores and polymers. Phosphines
results obtained by various methods. and their industrial uses. Frustrated Lewis acid bases as catalysts.
Superacids and their uses. Sulphonamides, industrial applications of
CML731 Chemical Separation and Electroanalytical sulfur and selenium. Fluorine in pharmaceuticals, fluoropolymers.
Methods
3 Credits (3-0-0) CML739/695 Applied Biocatalysis
Theory and applications of equilibrium and nonequilibrium 3 Credits (3-0-0)
separation techniques. Extraction, countercurrent distribution, gas Introduction to enzymes and enzyme catalysed reactions. Classification
chromatography, column and plane chromatographic techniques, and mechanism of reaction. Purification and characterization of
electrophoresis, ultracentrifugation, and other separation methods, enzymes. Michelis Menten kinetics, Industrial enzymes. Applications
Modern analytical and separation techniques used in biochemical of enzymes in diagnostics, analysis, biosensors and other industrial
analysis. Principles of electrochemical methods, electrochemical processes and bio-transformations. Enzyme structure determination,
reactions, steady-state and potential step techniques; polarography, stability and stabilisation. Enzyme immobilization and concept of
cyclic voltammetry, chrono methods, rotating disc and ring disc enzyme engineering. Nanobiocatalysis.
electrodes, concepts and applications of AC impedance techniques.
CML740/675 Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds
CML733 Chemistry of Industrial Catalysts
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Chemistry of heterocyclic compounds containing one, two and three
Fundamental aspects of Catalysis - Homogeneous & heterogeneous
heteroatoms. Total synthesis of representative natural products.
catalysis -The role of catalytic processes in modern chemical
manufacturing -organometallic catalysts -catalysis in organic
polymer chemistry -catalysis in petroleum industry - catalysis in CML741 Organo and organometallic catalysis
environmental control. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction. Enamine catalysis. Iminium catalysis. Asymmetric
CML734 Chemistry of Nanostructured Materials
proton catalysis. Ammonium ions as chiral templates. Chiral Lewis
3 Credits (3-0-0) bases as catalysts. Asymmetric acyl transfer reactions. Ylide based
Introduction; fundamentals of nanomaterials science, surface science reactions. Transition metal catalyzed reactions. C-H activation.
for nanomaterials, colloidal chemistry; Synthesis, preparation and N-Heterocyclic carbenes.
138

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Chemistry
CML742 Reagents in Synthetic Transformations chemical reaction pathways, excited state calculations, calculations
3 Credits (3-0-0) of spectral properties, ab initio molecular dynamics simulations
The course will cover the applications of various oxidation and
CMD799 Minor project
reduction reactions in organic chemistry with special emphasis on
special reagents that are used for selective transformations. Use of 3 Credits (0-0-6)
organolithium and organoboron compounds in organic synthesis and
olefin metathesis will also serve a part of the course. CML801 Molecular Modelling and Simulations: Concepts
and Techniques
CML743 physical Organic Chemistry Advanced 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Review of Basic Concepts: Length and Time Scales, Intermolecular
Interactions and Potential Energy Surfaces, Evaluation of Long-range
Overlap with: CML696
interactions Static and Dynamic Properties of Simple and Complex
Basic MO theory, Frontier Orbits and orbital mixing; Reactive
Liquids Molecular Dynamics: Microcanonical and other ensembles;
intermediates; Relationship between potential energy and the
Constrained simulations; non-equilibrium approaches Monte
perturbation to a chemical bond: Potential Energy Surfaces and the
Carlo Methods: Random Numbers and Random Walk, Metropolis
Reaction Coordinate; Simple rate laws (unimolecular and bimolecular);
Algorithm in various ensembles, Biased Monte Carlo Schemes Free
Arrhenius equation and Eyring equation, Transition State theory.
Energy Estimations: Mapping Phase Diagrams, Generating Free
Kinetics vs Thermodynamics control; Experimental investigation
Energy Landscapes, Collective Variables Rare Event Simulations
of reaction mechanisms and short lived intermediates; The Kinetic
and Reaction Dynamics
Isotope Effect; Reaction trajectories: Cross-over experiments;
VII. Advanced Topics: First principles molecular dynamics, Quantum
Characterisation of short lived intermediates; Examples of reactive
Monte Carlo methods, Coarse-Graining and Multiscale Simulations
species and their behavior Supramolecular chemistry. Electron transfer
for Nanoscale Systems, Quantum mechanics / molecular mechanics
reactions. Organic photochemical transformation (including catalysis).
(QM / MM) approaches. (To some extent, coverage of advanced topics
will depend on research interests of students and faculty since this
CML760 Computational Quantum Chemistry
is a Pre-Ph.D. course).
3 Credits (2-0-2)
CMD806 Major project part-I
Pre-requisite(s): CML511 or PYL555 or PYL556 or equivalent
6 Credits (0-0-12)
Overview of quantum chemistry, variational principle and its
applications, Hartree-Fock method, density functional calculations,
perturbation theory, configuration interactions, multi-configurational CMD807 Major project part-II
self-consistent field (MCSCF), Quantum chemical calculations, 12 Credits (0-0-24)
139

Department of Civil Engineering
CVL100 Environmental Science systems design and flows,; Characteristics and microbiology of
2 Credits (2-0-0) wastewater, BOD kinetics; Unit processes for wastewater treatment
(screening, sedimentation; biological aerobic and anaerobic
Pollutant sources and control in air and water, solid waste management,
process)-theory and design aspects; Biological processes (Nutrient
noise pollution and control, cleaner production and life cycle analysis,
and phosphorous removal); advanced wastewater treatment-
reuse, recovery, source reduction and raw material substitution, basics
theory and design aspects; Air pollution (health effects, regulatory
of environmental impact assessment, environmental risk assessment
standards, dispersion; stacks, control systems); Municipal solid waste
and environmental audit, emerging technologies for sustainable
management; Noise pollution.
environmental management, identification and evaluation of emerging
environmental issues with air, water, wastewater and solid wastes.
CVL222 Soil Mechanics
CVL111 Elements of Surveying 3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2) Origin and Classification of Soils; Phase Relationships; Effective
Stress Principle; Effective Stress Under Hydrostatic and 1D flow;
Introduction to Surveying, Levels, Theodolites, total station.
Permeability; Flow Through Soils–Laplace equation, flownets,
Measurement of distances, directions and elevations. Traversing.
seepage; Contaminant Transport; Compressibility; Consolidation;
Trigonometric levelling. Mapping and contouring. Measurement of
Terzaghi’s 1D Consolidation Theory; Shear Strength; Drainage
areas, volumes. Quantity computations. Errors of measurements
Conditions; Pore Water Pressure; Mohr’s Circle; Failure Envelope and
and their adjustments. Curve setting: simple, compound and reverse
Strength Parameters; Factors Affecting Shear Strength; Critical State
curves. Introduction to GPS, Differential GPS, Remote sensing
frame work; Behaviour of soils under cyclic loading, Liquefaction,;
techniques and application in land use change and mapping, arial
Compaction; Engineering properties of Natural soils, Compacted
surveying, photogrametery.
Soils and modified soils; Site Investigations; Soil deposits of India.
CVL121 Engineering Geology
CVp222 Soil Mechanics Lab
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Engineering Geology: Introduction; Dynamic Earth; Origin, Age,
Interior, Materials of Earth; Silicate Structures and Symmetry Elements; Pre-requisite(s): CVL222 or concurrent with CVL222
Physical properties, Formation of Rocks; Igneous, Sedimentary and Visual Soil Classification; Water Content; Atterberg Limits; Grain Size
Metamorphic processes and structures, Characterisation; Weathering Analysis; Specific Gravity; Permeability; standard proctor compaction
Processes; Geological Work of Rivers, Glaciers, Wind and Sea/Oceans, test, consolidation test, site investigations and introduction to
Deposits and Landforms; Formation of Soils; Geological Time Scale; triaxial testing.
Structural Features, Attitude of beds, Folds, Joints, Faults, Plate
tectonics; Stress Distribution; Geophysical methods,Earthquakes.
CVL242 Structural Analysis I
Engineering Properties of Rocks; Rock as Construction Material;
Geological Site Criteria for Tunnels and Underground Structures, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Foundations, Dams, Rock Slopes and Landslides. Pre-requisite(s): APL108
General Concept of Static Equilibrium of Structures, Concept of Free
CVp121 Engineering Geology Lab Body Diagram, Analysis of Statically Determinate Trusses, Energy
1 Credit (0-0-2) Methods for Determination of Joint Displacements - Castiliagno
Theorem, Unit Load Method etc., Introduction to Analysis of
Pre-requisite(s): CVL121 or concurrent with CVL121
Statically Indeterminate Trusses using Energy Methods, Analysis
Geological Maps, Geological Mapping – contouring, topo sheets,
Statically Determinate Beams - Moment Area Theorem, Conjugate
outcrops, apparent and true dips, three point problems, depth and
Beam Method, Maxwell Betti Theorem, Method of Superposition,
thickness problems, joints, faults; Megascopic and Microscopic
Application of Energy Methods to Statically Determinate Beams and
identification of Minerals and Rocks, Engineering properties of rocks,
Rigid Frames, Solving Simple Indeterminate Beams Structures using
refraction and resistivity methods, Guided tour through representative
Energy Methods, Analysis of Rolling Loads and Influence Line Diagram,
geological formations and structures.
Analysis of Arches and cable structures.
CVL141 Civil Engineering Materials
CVp242 Structural Analysis Lab
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Mechanical properties of engineered materials, Temperature
and time effects. Failure and safety. Non-mechanical properties. Pre-requisite(s): CVL242 or Concurrent with CVL242
Durability. Nature of materials, classes of materials based on Determination of forces and displacements in statically determinate
bonding, inorganic and organic solids. Variability in materials and and indeterminate trusses, Influence Line Diagram for Trusses,
its implication on measurement. Cement based materials, concrete Measurement of bending moment and shear forces in beams,
production and processes; properties. Steel and other metals used Determination of Elastic Properties of Beams, Verification of the
in construction. Bricks and Masonry; wood and engineered wood Moment Area Theorem, Maxwell Betti Theorem, Influence Line
products; glass and heat transmission properties. Polymers for Diagram for Displacement, Support Reaction, Shear Force at an
construction and maintenance of infrastructure. Composites: fiber Intermediate Section and Bending Moment, Determination of Carry
reinforced composites, particle reinforced composites. Introduction over Factor, Verification of Carry Over Factor, Determination of
to sustainable materials. displacements in curved members, Analysis of Elastically Coupled
Beams, Determination of horizontal reactions in two and three hinged
arches, experiment on cable structures.
CVL212 Environmental Engineering
4 Credits (3-0-2)
CVL243 Reinforced Concrete Design
Pre-requisite(s): CVL100
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Water and wastewater treatment overview; Unit processes: systems of
water purification, processes (sedimentation, coagulation-flocculation, Pre-requisite(s): CVL141
softening, disinfection, adsorption, ion exchange, filtration) and Design Philosophy: Working stress and limit state design concepts;
kinetics in unit operation of water purification-theory and design Design of and detailing of RC beam sections in flexure, shear, torsion
aspects; distribution of water layout systems: design aspects; and bond; Design for serviceability; Design of RC beams, One way
Wastewater engineering: systems of sanitation, wastewater collection and two way RC slabs, RC short and long columns, RC footings.
140

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
CVp243 Materials and Structures Laboratory Concrete Equation in 2-dimension, Boundary layer characteristics, Integral
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Momentum equation, onset of turbulence, properties of turbulent flow,
skin friction,application of drag, lift and circulation to hydraulic problems.
Testing of cement, testing of aggregates, mixture design and
testing, non-destructive tests, testing of reinforcement, behaviour of Pipe Flow: Laminar and Turbulent flow in Smooth and Rough pipes,
reinforced concrete beams under flexure and torsion, behaviour of pipe network analysis, Losses in pipes
reinforced concrete slabs under uniform and point loads, behaviour Fluvial Hydraulics: Settling velocity, Incipient motion, Resistance to
of reinforced concrete columns under concentric and eccentric loads. flow and bed forms, Sediment load and transport.
CVL244 Construction practices CVp281 Hydraulics Lab
2 Credits (2-0-0) 1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): EC35 Pre-requisite(s): CVL281 or Concurrent with CVL281
Introduction and role of technologies, Construction technologies in Experiments on Open Channel Flow Hydraulics, Boundary Layer
RC Buildings for Reinforcement, Formwork, and concreting activities, Theory, Pipe flow, Sediment transport.
Excavation and Concreting equipment, Formwork material and Design
Concepts, Formwork system for Foundations, walls, columns, slab and CVL282 Engineering Hydrology
beams and their design, Flying Formwork such as Table form, tunnel 4 Credits (3-0-2)
form. Slipform, temporary structures failure, Determining construction
Pre-requisite(s): APL107
loads and ensuring safety of slabs during construction of high rise
buildings- shoring, reshoring, preshroing and backshoring technology, Hydrologic Cycle, Processes and Applied Methodologies. Rainfall;
Top down construction technology for high rise and underground Evapotranspiration; Infiltration;
construction, Bridge construction including segmental construction, Groundwater: Occurrence, Movement, Governing equations, Well
incremental construction and push launching techniques, Prefab hydraulics.
construction. Runoff: Hydrograph, Unit Hydrographs; Streamflow measurement.
Flood Routing: Hydrological routing for reservoirs and channels.
CVL245 Construction Management Frequency Analysis.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
CVL284 Fundamentals of Geographic Information
Pre-requisite(s): EC35
Systems
Introduction to construction projects, stakeholders, phases in a
project, Cost estimation from clients perspective, Project selection 3 Credits (2-0-2)
using time value of money concept, construction contract, cost Pre-requisite(s): COL100
estimate –contractors perspective, Project planning and network
What is GIS. Geographic concepts for GIS. Spatial relationships,
analysis-PERT, CPM, and Precedence Network, Resource scheduling,
topology, spatial patterns, spatial interpolation. Data storage, data
Time Cost trade off, Time -cost monitoring and control using S-curve
structure, non-spatial database models. Populating GIS, digitizing data
and earned value analysis, Construction claims and disputes, and
exchange, data conversion. Spatial data models, Raster and Vector
introduction to construction quality and safety.
data structures and algorithms. Digital Elevation Models (DEM) and
their application. Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN) model. GIS
CVL261 Introduction to Transportation Engineering application areas, Spatial analysis, quantifying relationships, spatial
3 Credits (3-0-0) statistics, spatial search. Decision making in GIS context.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL111
CVL311 Industrial Waste Management
Transportation systems and their classification; Role of transportation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
with respect to socio-economic conditions; Transportation planning
process; Road user and the vehicle; Geometric design of roads: Pre-requisite(s): CVL212
horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, cross-section elements; Industrial waste types and characteristics; levels of environmental
Relevant geometric design standards; Pavements: flexible and pollution due to industrial wastes; health issues due to industrial
rigid; Characterization of pavement materials; Analysis and design wastes; ecological and human health risk assessment due to
of pavement systems; Pavement design specifications; Pavement industrial wastes; waste characterization methods; treatment
construction process; Pavement performance; Traffic engineering: methods-conventional and recent trends (for air, water, soil media);
Traffic characteristics; Fundamental relationships; Theories of Prevention versus control of industrial pollution; hierarchy of priorities
traffic flow; Intersection design; Design of traffic signs and signals; for industrial waste management; comparison of real-life industrial
Highway capacity. waste management practices (ex: superfund remedial sites, etc.);
economics of industrial waste management and sustainability issues;
CVp261 Transportation Engineering Lab environmental rules and regulations; clean up goals;disposal/reuse of
treated wastes; Source reduction and control of industrial water and
1 Credit (0-0-2)
air pollution; Minimization of industrial solid and hazardous waste;
Pre-requisite(s): CVL261 or Concurrent with CVL261 Waste management case studies from various industries.
Introduction to material behavior; Characterization of materials used
in pavement construction: soil, aggregate, asphalt, asphalt concrete; CVL312 Environmental Assessment Methodologies
Introduction to traffic survey methodologies; Traffic surveys: speed 3 Credits (3-0-0)
studies, intersection study.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL212
Environmental issues related to developmental activities: Nature
CVL281 Hydraulics
and characteristics of environmental impacts of urban and industrial
4 Credits (3-1-0)
developments.
Pre-requisite(s): APL107 Linkages between technology, environmental quality, economic gain,
Open Channel Flow: Channel Characteristics and parameters, Uniform and societal goals.
flow, Critical flow, Specific Energy concepts, Gradually Varied Flows, Environmental indices and indicators for describing affected
Rapidly Varied flow with special reference to hydraulic jump, Unsteady environment. Methodologies and environmental systems modeling
flow in open channels. tools for prediction and assessment of impacts on environmental
Boundary Layer Theory: Navier Stokes Equation, Boundary Layer quality (surface water, ground water, air, soil).
141

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Monitoring and control of undesirable environmental implications. of tension, compression and flexural members; Design of members
Environmental cost benefit analysis. Decision methods for evaluation subjected to combined loadings-Axial and bending, Torsion, Biaxial
of environmentally sound alternatives. bending; Column bases, Gantry and plate girders; Roof trusses;
Environmental health and safety: Basic concepts of environmental Plastic design; Introduction to stability concepts, Design of shed-
risk and definitions; Hazard identification procedures; Consequence type structures.
analysis and modeling (discharge models, dispersion models, fire and
CVp342 Materials and Structures Laboratory-Steel
explosion models, effect models etc.).
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Emerging tools for environmental management: Environmental
Management Systems, Environmentally sound technology transfer, Basic properties of structural steel; Tensile stress-strain behaviour;
emission trading, international resource sharing issues, climate Buckling of slender columns, Flexural testing of beams; Torsional
change, international environmental treaties and protocols. behaviour of beams, Unsymmetrical bending; Lateral-torsional
Case studies. buckling; Flexural-torsional buckling; Connection behaviour; Tension-
field action in plate girders.
CVL313 Air and Noise pollution
CVL344 Construction project Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL212
Pre-requisite(s): CVL245
Definitions, source and types of air and noise pollution, physical and
chemical properties of air pollutants, secondary pollutants formation, Additional network analysis- Ladder Network, LoB,etc., Time
instrument design and industrial application, gas phase adsorption and constrained Resource allocation and resource constrained problems,
biofiltration, carbon Credit, global warming potential, case studies, Time Cost trade off, project updating and control using EVM,
data analysis, interpretation. Construction contracts and its types, tendering procedure, estimation
and fixing of markup, bidding models, claims compensation and
CVL321 Geotechnical Engineering disputes, dispute resolution models, FIDIC contracts, Linear
programming, Problems in construction, Formulation, Graphical
4 Credits (3-1-0)
solution, Simplex method, Dual problem, sensitivity analysis and their
Pre-requisite(s): CVL222 application to Civil engineering, Transportation Assignment problems
Foundations: types, selection and design considerations; Bearing and their applications
capacity of shallow foundations: Terzaghi theory, factors affecting;
Bearing capacity of deep foundations: single pile analysis, pile tests, CVL361 Introduction to Railway Engineering
pile driving formula, group capacity, introduction to laterally loaded 3 Credits (3-0-0)
piles; Settlement of shallow and deep foundations: stress distribution,
Pre-requisite(s): CVL261
immediate and consolidation settlements; Slope stability analysis:
infinite slopes, method of slices, Swedish circle method; Earth dams: History: Indian railways, international perspective; Railway track
types and design aspects; Earth pressure analysis: Rankine and gauge: factors affecting gauge choice, multi gauge; New project
Coulomb methods; Earth retaining structures: types, design aspects, planning and surveys; Alignment of railway track; Structure of railway
underground structures; Earthquake geotechnics: evaluation of track: rails, sleepers, ballast, subgrade, track fittings; Structural
liquefaction potential, seismic slope stability, seismic bearing capacity; design of railway track: stresses, creep; Geometric design of rail
Machine foundations: types, analysis, design procedure; Ground track: gradients, curves, superelevation; Locomotives and rolling
improvement techniques: types, deep stabilization, anchorage, stock: resistance and tractive power; Points and crossings; Railway
grouting; Geosynthetics: types, functions, properties; reinforced soil stations and yards; Traffic control; Signalling and interlocking; Public
walls; Geoenvironment: Landfills - types, liner, cover, stability; Ash rail transportation in metros.
ponds - stage raising, design aspects.
CVL381 Design of Hydraulic Structures
CVp321 Geotechnical Engineering Lab 4 Credits (3-0-2)
1 Credit (0-0-2) Pre-requisite(s): CVL281 and CVL282
Pre-requisite(s): CVL321 or Concurrent with CVL321 Input studies.
Vane shear test, Direct shear test, Specimen preparation, Unconfined Storage structures: Dams and reservoirs, Different types of dams and
compression test, Unconsolidated undrained test, Consolidated selection of suitable type and dam site, Gravity dam, Embankment
drained test, Consolidated undrained test with pore water pressure dams. Diversion works: Design concepts for irrigation structures
measurement. on permeable foundations, Design of Weirs and barrages. Design
of energy dissipation devices. Canals: canal layout, Regime canal
CVL341 Structural Analysis II design, Rigid boundary canal design. Design of canal falls. Design of
3 Credits (3-0-0) cross drainage works. Design of head regulator, cross regulator and
canal outlet structures.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL242
Determinacy and stability; Method of consistent deformations- CVL382 Groundwater
Matrix formulation, Application to beams, trusses and frames;
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Slope-deflection method and Moment-distribution method- Beams
and frames with uneven loading, support settlements, dealing Pre-requisite(s): CVL282 or EC 75
with symmetry and anti-symmetry, Non-sway and sway frames; Introduction, importance and occurrence of groundwater; Aquifers and
Matrix stiffness method; Matrix flexibility method; Energy methods; groundwater scenario in India; Surface and subsurface investigation
Approximate methods of analysis; Direct stiffness method for of groundwater; Construction, development and maintenance of
computer applications including computational aspects and MATLAB wells; Flow through porous media, Darcy’s law, regional flow; Well
Assignments. hydraulics; Groundwater management.
CVL342 Design of Steel Structures CVL383 Water Resources Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0) 2 Credits (2-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL242 Pre-requisite(s): CVL282
Structural steel and properties, Design pholisophy-Working stress and Water Resources Planning Purposes and Objectives; Multi-component,
limit state; Connection types- Riveted, bolted and welded; Design multi-user, multi-objective and multi-purpose attributes of an
142

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
Integrated Water Resources System; Economic basis for selection of a CVL422 Rock Engineering
Plan Alternative; Introduction to Linear Programming and applications 3 Credits (3-0-0)
in Water Resources Engineering; Linear, Deterministic Integrated
Water Resources Management Model on River Basin Scale. Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
Geological classification, rock and rock mass classification, strength
and deformation behaviour of rocks, pore pressures, failure criteria,
CVL384 Urban Hydrology
laboratory and field testing, measurement of in-situ stresses
2 Credits (2-0-0)
and strains, stability of rock slopes and foundations, design of
Pre-requisite(s): CVL282 or EC 75 underground structures, improvement of in situ properties of rock
Distinctive characteristics of natural and urban watersheds; Urban masses and support measures.
Heat Island; Changes in rainfall, infiltration and runoff characteristics
in urban watershed; IDF relationship and its adaptation for urban
CVL423 Soil Dynamics
settings; Adjusting runoff record for urbanization; Stormwater
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Management and rainwater harvesting; Urban drainage: layout,
structures, flooding and control, combined sewer overflows, Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
sedimentation; Management of stormwater. Engineering problems involving soil dynamics; Role of inertia;
Theory of Vibrations: Single and two-degree freedom systems; Wave
CVL385 Frequency Analysis in Hydrology propagation in elastic media; Soil behaviour under cyclic/dynamic
2 Credits (2-0-0) loading; Small and large strain dynamic properties of soils; Design
criteria for machine foundations; Elastic homogeneous half space and
Pre-requisite(s): CVL282 lumped parameter solutions; Vibration isolation; Codal provisions;
Concepts of probability in Hydrology, Random events, Random Causes of Earthquakes; Strong Ground Motion: Measurement,
variables; moments and expectations; Common probabilistic characterization and estimation; Amplification theory and ground
distributions; goodness of fit tests; Stochastic processes. response analysis; Liquefaction of soil and its remediation; Seismic
slope stability; Seismic bearing capacity and earth pressures
CVL386 Fundamentals of Remote Sensing
3 Credits (2-0-2) CVL424 Environmental Geotechniques & Geosynthetics
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 3 Credits (3-0-0)
What is Remote Sensing? Historical development of remote sensing, Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
Remote sensing components, Data collection and transmission,
Causes and effects of subsurface contamination; Waste disposal on
Sensors and satellite imageries, Electromagnetic energy and spectrum,
land; Characteristics of solid wastes; Waste Containment Principles;
Wavebands, Interactions of electromagnetic energy with atmosphere
Types of landfills; Planning of landfills; Design of liners and covers
and earth’s surface, radiometric quantities, Photogrammetry and
for landfills; Environmental Monitoring around landfills; Detection,
aerial photography, Vertical and tilted photographs, Photographic
control and remediation of subsurface contamination; Geotechnical
materials, Photo-processes, Stereoscopic viewing, fly view, Aerial
re-use of solid waste materials.
mosaics, Various satellite systems and monitoring programs, Data
Products, Satellite data, Data formats, Data acquisition for natural Types of geosynthetics; Manufacturing; Functions; Testing and
resources management and weather forecast, Random errors and evaluation; Designing with geotextiles, geogrids, geonets and
least square adjustment, Coordinate transformation, Photographic geomembranes.
interpretation, Image processing, Potential applications of remote
sensing in diverse areas and decision making, Integrated use of
CVL431 Design of Foundations & Retaining Structures
remote sensing and GIS, Case studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVD411 B.Tech. project part-I Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
4 Credits (0-0-8) Shallow Foundations: Bearing Capacity, Generalized bearing capacity
theory, Empirical methods, Layered soil, Foundations on or near
CVD412 B.Tech. project part-II slopes, Settlement of foundations, codal provisions.
6 Credits (0-0-12) Pile Foundations: Types and their selection, Ultimate load of individual
piles in compressive, uplift, and lateral loading, Pile load tests,
CVL421 Ground Engineering Downdrag, Pile groups. Caissons. Codal provisions.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Earth Retaining Structures: Types, Earth pressures, Design of rigid,
flexible and reinforced soil retaining walls, braced excavations, and
Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
ground anchors for retaning walls.
Planning of investigation programmes, Geophysical methods. Methods
Introduction to design of foundation for dynamic loads.
of site investigations: Direct methods, semi-direct methods and
indirect methods, Drilling methods. Boring in soils and rocks, Methods
of stabilizing the bore holes, measurement of water table, field CVL432 Stability of Slopes
record. Principles of compaction, Laboratory compaction,Engineering
2 Credits (2-0-0)
behaviour of compacted clays, Field compaction techniques- static,
vibratory, impact, Compaction control. Shallow stabilization with Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
additives: Lime, fly ash, cement and other chemicals and bitumen; Deep Slope Stability: Short term and long term stabilities; Limit equilibrium
Stabilization: sand column, stone column, sand drains, prefabricated methods; Infinite slopes; Finite height slopes - Swedish method,
drains, electroosmosis, lime column. soil-lime column, blasting. Bishop’s simplified method, Stability charts; Conditions of analysis
Grouting : permeation, compaction and jet. Vibro-floatation, dynamic - steady state, end of construction, sudden draw down conditions;
compaction, thermal freezing. Dewatering systems. Functions and Factor of safety; Codal provisions; Earthquake effects. Seepage
applications of geosynthetics – geotextiles, geogrids, geomembranes; Analysis: Types of flow; Laplace equation; Flownet in isotropic,
soil reinforcement using strips, bars and geosynthetics; soil nailing anisotropic and layered media; Entrance-exit conditions; Theoretical
and ground anchors, Earthmoving machines and earthwork solutions; Determination of phreatic line. Earth Dams: Introduction;
principles, Piling and diaphragm wall construction, Tunneling Factors influencing design; Design of components; Instrumentation.
methods in soils, Hydraulic barriers and containment systems for Reinforced Slopes: Steep slopes; Embankments on soft soils;
waste disposal in soil, Control and remediation of soil contamination. Reinforcement design.
143

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
CVL433 FEM in Geotechnical Engineering CVL442 Structural Analysis-III
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL321 Pre-requisite(s): CVL341
Steps in FEM. Stress-deformation analysis: One dimensional, Two Introduction to FEM for structural analysis with review of energy
dimensional and Three-dimensional formulations. Discretization of methods-2D plane stress and plane strain elements, beam element,
a Continuum, Elements, Strains, Stresses, Constitutive, Relations, 2D bending element, example problems, elements of structural
Hooke’s Law, Formulation of Stiffness Matrix, Boundary Conditions, dynamics-free and forced vibration of SDOF system, treatment of
Solution Algorithms. impact and arbitrary loading, frequency and time domain analysis;
free vibration mode shapes and frequencies of MDOF systems;
Settlement Analysis, 2-D elastic solutions for homogeneous, isotropic
normal mode theory for forced vibration analysis of MODF system;
medium, Steady Seepage Analysis: Finite element solutions of
example problems. Elements of plastic analysis; upper and lower
Laplace’s equation, Consolidation Analysis: Terzaghi consolidation
bound theorems; methods of collapse mechanism; application to
problem, Choice of Soil Properties for Finite Element Analysis,
beams and multistory frames; example problems.
Introduction to PHASE 2.
CVL443 prestressed Concrete & Industrial Structures
CVp434 Geotechnical Design Studio
3 Credits (3-0-0)
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL241, CVL243, CVL341
Pre-requisite(s): CVL321 Prestressed Concrete Structures-Fundamentals of presenting,
Seepage analysis through an earth dam. Slope stability analysis of a Prestressing technology, Analysis of prestressed losses, Design for
dam. Settlement analysis of shallow and deep foundations; Analysis Flexure, Design for shear and torsion, Design of anchorage Zones in
and design of retaining structures; Analysing the structural forces Post-tensioned members.
in a tunnel lining. Industrial Structures-Analysis and design of Cylindrical shell
structures, Folded plates, Chimneys, Silos, Bunkers.
CVL435 Underground Structures
CVL461 Logistics and Freight Transport
2 Credits (2-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL321
Overlaps with: SML843
Overlaps with: CVL713
Pre-requisite(s): CVL261 or Instructor’s permission
Types and classification of underground structures, Functional
Evolution of freight and logistics; Interrelationships between
aspects, Sizes and shapes, Support systems, Design methodology.
society, environment and freight transport; Survey methodologies
Stresses-deformation analysis of openings (circular, elliptical,
to understand freight movement; Cost measurement: Production,
spherical, ellipsoidal) using analytical and numerical methods.
Holding, Transportation, Handling; Effect of internal and external
Design of underground structures using analytical methods, variables on cost; Demand forecasting; Inventory planning and
empirical methods and observational methods, Rock support management; Transportation and distribution network: Design,
interaction analysis, NATM Hydraulic tunnels, Shafts, Tunnel portals, Development, Management; Ware house operations; Pricing:
Metro tunnels. Perishable, seasonal demand, uncertainty issues; Vehicle routing:
One-to-one distribution, One-to-many distribution, Shortest path
algorithm, Quickest time algorithm; Logistics information system;
CVL441 Structural Design
Designing and planning transportation networks; Multi-modal
3 Credits (3-0-0) transportation issues.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL241, CVL243, CVL342
CVL462 Introduction to Intelligent Transportation
Design of Reinforced Cement concrete (RCC) Structures – Building
Systems
frames Liquid retaining structures, Earth Retaining walls.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Design of Steel Structures – Plate girders, gantry girders and steel
bridge components. Pre-requisite(s): CVL261
Introduction to Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS); ITS
Organizational Issues, the fundamental concepts of Intelligent
CVp441 Structural Design & Detailing
Transportation Systems (ITS) to students with interest in engineering,
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
transportation systems, communication systems, vehicle technologies,
Pre-requisite(s): CVL243, CVL342 transportation planning, transportation policy, and urban planning.
ITS in transportation infrastructure and vehicles, that improve
Part-I Concrete Structures
transportation safety, productivity, environment, and travel reliability.
Computer-aided analysis and design of real-life reinforced concrete Mobile device applications of ITS such as trip planners.
(RC) structure. Dimensioning of concrete elements based on modular
formworks available in construction industry. Detailing of concrete CVL481 Water Resources Management
elements in terms of reinforcement, curtailment, lapping, splicing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of reinforcements and connection with adjoining elements in the
structure; member drawings. Joint detailing from ductility view point, Pre-requisite(s): CVL282 and EC 100
Indian standard (IS) code recommendations and practical intricacies Scope of water resources management, Global trends in water
involved in casting and handling of the RC members, its sequence of utilization, Crop water requirements and irrigation, Planning and
construction and constructability. desing of various irrigation methods, Soil salinity and water logging,
Hydropower systems management, Strom water system management,
Part-II Steel Structures
Economic analysis of water resources projects, Flood Control studies.
Computer-aided analysis and design of real-life steel structure. Steel
member details as per shop/ field activities for welding/ bolting; i.e. CVL482 Water power Engineering
fabrication (shop) drawings. Connection details, gusset plate design 3 Credits (2-0-2)
and detailing from ductility view point, Indian standard (IS) code
recommendations and practical intricacies involved in fabrication Pre-requisite(s): CVL281 and EC 100
and handling of the steel members, its sequence of erection and Basic principle of hydropower generation, Hydropower Project
constructability. Planning, Site selection, Hydropower development schemes, Reservoir
144

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
storage, Assessment of power potential, Hydrologic analysis: Flow Determination of parameters. Shear behavior of fine grained soils.
duration and load duration curves, Dependable flow, Design flood, Pore-pressure parameters. UU, CU, CD tests. Total and effective
Reservoir operation; Hydraulic design of various components of stress-strength parameters. Total and effective stress-paths. Water
hydropower plants: intakes, hydraulic turbines, conduits and water content contours. Factors affecting strength : stress history, rate of
conveyance, penstock; Performance characteristics of turbines, testing, structure and temperature. Anisotropy of strength, thixotropy,
Specific and unit quantities, Electrical load on hydro-turbines, Power creep. Determination of in-situ undrained strength. Stress-strain
house dimension and planning, Water hammer and surge analysis, characteristics of soils. Determination of modulus values. Critical
Surge tanks, Small and micro hydro power development, tidal plants, state model, Engineering behaviour of soils of India: Black cotton
Current scenarios in hydropower development, Project feasibility, soils, alluvial silts and sands, laterites, collapsible and sensitive soils.
Impact of hydropower development on water sources systems,
environment, socioeconomic conditions and national economy. CVp700 Soil Engineering Lab
3 Credits (0-0-6)
CVL483 Groundwater & Surface-water pollution
Laboratory Tests: Preparation of samples-Sand and Clay, Consolidation
2 Credits (2-0-0) test, Direct shear test, Vane shear test, Unconfined compression test,
Pre-requisite(s): CVL282 and EC 100 Unconsolidated undrained triaxial test, Consolidated drained triaxial
test, Consolidated undrained triaxial test with pore water pressure
Groundwater contamination; River and Lake pollution; Pollution
measurement, Free swell index test, Swelling pressure test.
sources, Geogenic and anthropogenic pollution; Soil Pollution;
Contaminant transport mechanisms; Pollution control, remediation Field Investigations and field tests: Drilling of bore hole, standard
technologies and role of wetlands. Environmental impact assessments, penetration test. undisturbed and representative sampling. SCP Test,
Hydrological impacts, Vulnerability, Case studies. Electrical resistivity, Plate load test, Pile load test.
CVp484 Computational Aspects in Water Resources CVL701 Site Investigation and Foundation Design
3 Credits (1-0-4) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Site Investigation: Geophysical methods-Seismic, electrical; Drilling
Pre-requisite(s): CVL281 and EC 100
methods; Boring in soils and rocks. Field tests: In-situ tests, SPT,
Numerical Interpolation and Integration and application to water
DCPT, SCPT, in-situ vane shear test, pressure meter test, plate load
resources problems; Numerical solution of differential equations
test. Sampling techniques and disturbances. Shallow Foundations:
in Water Resources such as groundwater flow, pipe flows, open
Design considerations, codal provisions. Bearing capacity theories,
channel flows.
Layered soils, Choice of shear strength parameters. Bearing capacity
from field tests. Total and differential settlements. Deep foundations:
CVL485 River Mechanics
Types of piles. Construction methods. Axial capacity of single piles.
3 Credits (2-0-2) Axial capacity of groups. Settlement of single piles and groups. Uplift
Pre-requisite(s): CVL281 and EC 100 capacity (including under-reamed piles) . Negative skin friction. Pile
load tests. Pile integrity tests. Codal provisions. Caissons.
Introduction, river morpohology, drainage patterns, stream order.
Properties of mixture of sediment and water, Incipient motion and Laterally Loaded Piles: Analysis and Design; Foundations in Difficult
quantitative approach to incipient motion, channel degradation and soil conditions.
armoring. Bed forms and resistance to flow, various approaches
for bed load transport, suspended load profile and suspended load CVL702 Ground Improvement and Geosynthetics
equations, total load transport including total load transport equations. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Comparison and evaluation of sediment transport equations. Stable
Principles of compaction, Engineering behaviour of compacted clays.
channel design with critical tractive force theory.
Shallow stabilization with additives: lime, fly ash and cement. Deep
stabilization: stone column, sand drains, prefabricated drains, lime
CVL486 Geo-informatics
column, soil-lime column, vibro-floatation, dynamic compaction,
3 Credits (2-0-2) electro-osmosis. Grouting : permeation, compaction and jet;
Dewatering systems. Geosynthetics: types and functions, materials
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
and manufacturing processes, testing and evaluation; Reinforced soil
Geospatial and temporal data, Data acquisition, Global positioning
structures: principles of soil reinforcement, application of geotextiles
system, Global Navigational Satellite System, GPS survey, Aerial
and geogrids in roads, walls, and embankments. Application of
and laser scanning surveys, Data acquisition using remote sensing
geotextiles, geonets and geocomposites as drains and filters.
techniques, Sensors and satellite imageries, Stereoscopic 3D viewing,
Multiple functions: railways and overlay design. Geosynthetics in
Fly view, Satellite data formats and specifications, Data acquisition
environmental control: covers and liners for landfills – material aspects
for natural resources management and weather forecast, Image
and stability considerations.
processing and interpretation, GIS concepts and Spatial data models,
Introduction to microwave remote sensing & LiDAR, Geospatial
CVL703 Geoenvironmental Engineering
analysis, DEM/DTM generation & 3D modelling, Inferential statistics,
Spatial interpolation, Integrated use of geospatial technologies, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Applications and case studies. Subsurface Contamination and Contaminant Transport; Waste
disposal on Land; Waste containment in Landfills and Slurry ponds,
CVD700 Minor project Monitoring of subsurface contamination, Control and Remediation.
Engineering Properties of waste and geotechnical reuse, erosoin
3 Credits (0-0-6)
control, sustainability, energy geotechnics.
CVL700 Engineering Behaviour of Soils
CVL704 Finite Element Method in Geotechnical
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Engineering
Origin, nature and distribution of soils. Description of individual
particle. Clay mineralogy, clay-water-electrolytes. Soil fabric and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
structure. Effective stress principle. Steady state flow in soils. Effect Introduction. Steps in FEM. Variational Methods, Stress-deformation
of flow on effective stress. Determination of coefficient of permeability. analysis: One-Two dimensional formulations; Three-dimensional
Consolidation: one, two, three dimensional and radial consolidation. formulations; Boundary conditions; Solution algorithms; Discretization;
Various consolidation tests and determination of parameters. Use of Commercial packages. Analysis of foundations, dams,
Stress-path. Triaxial and direct shear tests. Shear behaviour of soils underground structures and earth retaining structures. Analysis of
under static and dynamic loads. Factors affecting shear beahviour. flow (seepage) through dams and foundations. Consolidation Analysis,
145

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Linear and non-linear analysis. Insitu stresses. Sequence construction pelagic soils. Submarine soils of India. Engineering behaviour
and excavation. Joint/interface elements. Infinite elements. Dynamic of submarine soils: under-consolidated soils, calcareous soils,
analysis. Evaluation of material parameters for linear and non-linear cemented soils, corals; Offshore site investigations: sampling and
analysis, Recent developments. sampling disturbance, insitu testing, wireline technology. Offshore
pile foundations for jacket type structures. Foundations of gravity
CVL705 Slopes and Retaining Structures
structures; Foundations for jackup rigs. Anchors and breakout forces;
3 Credits (3-0-0) anchor systems for floating structures. Stability of submarine slopes.
Slope stability: infinite slopes; finite height slopes – Swedish method, Installation and stability of submarine pipelines.
Bishop’s simplified method and other limit equilibrium methods;
CVD710 Minor project (CEU)
Stability charts; conditions of analysis – steady state, end of
construction and sudden draw down; earthquake effects. Seepage: 3 Credits (0-0-6)
flownet in isotropic, anisotropic and layered media; entrance-exit
conditions; determination of phreatic line. Earth Dams: Introduction, CVL710 Engineering properties of Rocks and Rock Masses
factors influencing design, design of components, construction, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
instrumentation. Road and rail embankments. Reinforced slopes.
Introduction. Rock materials, Physical properties, Strength behaviour
Soil nailing; Gabions. Earth Pressure: Types; Rankine’s theory and
in uniaxial compression, tension and triaxial state. Laboratory testing
Coulomb’s theory; Effects due to wall friction; Graphical methods;
methods. Stress-strain relationships. Factors influencing strength.
Earthquake effects. Rigid retaining structures: Types; stability
Failure mechanism. Anisotropy. Failure criteria, Coulomb, Mohr’s,
analysis. Flexible retaining structures: Types; material; cantilever
Griffiths and Modified Griffiths criteria and Empirical criteria. Brittle
sheet piles; anchored bulkheads–methods of analysis, moment
– ductile transition, Post failure behaviour. Strength and deformation
reduction factors; anchorage. Reinforced soil walls: Elements and
behaviour of discontinuities. Rock mass behaviour, Shear strength of
stability. Soil arching. Braced excavation: Pressure distribution in
jointed rocks, roughness, peak and residual strengths. Strength criteria
sands and clays; bottom heave. Underground structures in soils:
for rock mass. Intact and rock mass classifications, Terzaghi, RQD,
Pipes; tunnels. Tunneling techniques.
RSR, RMR, GSI and Q classifications, Rating, Applications. Creep and
cyclic loading. Direct shear of joints in CNL, CNS conditions, Weathered
CVL706 Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Geotechnical
rocks. Flow through intact and fissured rocks. Dynamic properties.
Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0) CVp710 Rock Mechanics Laboratory 1
Engineering problems involving soil dynamics; Role of inertia; Theory 3 Credits (0-0-6)
of Vibrations: Single and two-degrees of freedom systems, vibration
Tests and test procedures, Rock samples,Specimen preparation,
measuring instruments, Vibration absorption and isolation techniques;
Coring, cutting and lapping. Tolerance limits.
Wave propagation: elastic continuum medium and semi-infinite elastic
Physical properties: Water absorption, density, specific gravity,
continuum medium; Measurement of small strain and large strain
porosity, void index, electrical resistivity and sonic wave velocity
dynamic soil properties: Field and Laboratory tests; Selection of design
tests. Mechanical Properties: Uniaxial compression, Point load index
values; Machine Foundations: Design criteria for machine foundations,
and Brazilian strength tests, Stroin Measurements, Elastic properties.
elastic homogeneous half space solutions, lumped parameter
Effect of L/D ratio and saturation. Strength anisotropy. Shear tests:
solutions, Codal provisions, Design of Pile-supported machine
Single, double, oblique tests, punch shear,Triaxial compression tests,
foundations; Strong Ground Motion: Measurement, characterization
Direct shear test. Slake durability and Permeability tests. Compilation
and estimation; Amplification theory, and ground response analysis;
of test data. Classification. IS and ISRM Codal provisions.
Liquefaction of soils: evaluation using simple methods and mitigation
measures; Seismic slope stability analysis; Seismic bearing capacity
CVL711 Structural Geology
and earth pressures; Codal provisions.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL707 Soil-Structure Interaction Analysis Origin, interior and composition of the earth. Rock cycle, Igneous,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Metamorphic and Sedimentary rocks. Rock structures. Plate
Basic Soil Models: Single parameter model - Winkler; Two parameter tectonics, Continental drift and sea floor spreading. Geological
models - Filonenko-Borodick, Pasternak; Elastic Continuum - plane time scale. Layered formations, Attitude, true and apparent dips,
strain, plane stress, Boussinesq’s problem, line load, strip load; Special topographic maps, outcrops. Measurement of attitude of formations.
models starting with elastic continuum - Vlazov, Reissner; Three Folds, types of folds, classification, field study of folds, mechanics of
parameter model - Kerr model; Evaluation of model parameters for folds, causes of folding. Joints, rock mass concept, Joint description
different conditions. Beam on Winkler foundation: solutions for infinite and classification. Three point problems, Depth and thickness
and semi-infinite beams; Finite beams: method of initial parameters, problems. Faults, mechanics of faulting, normal, reverse and
method of superposition. Beams on Elastic continuum: Use of finite thrusts, faults. Lineations. Foliations, Schistocity. Fault problems.
difference method, rigid and flexible beams, lift-off, non-homogeneous Stereographic projection methods, Kinematics of joints and faults,
soil, non-linear soil, plastic yielding of soil. Raft or Mat foundations: Use of DIPS software, presentation of geological data and analysis,
thin rectangular plates, approximate theory of plates, circular Applications, Scan line survey of rock joints in the field visit.
plates. Pile on Winkler foundation: Vertically loaded pile - rigid pile,
CVL712 Slopes and Foundations
evaluation of spring stiffness, non-homogeneous soil, compressible
pile; Laterally loaded pile - rigid pile, Elastic pile, standard solutions 3 Credits (3-0-0)
for different end conditions; Pile on elastic continuum : vertically Introduction, Short-term and long-term stability. Influence of ground
loaded piles - rigid pile. water, Seismic effects. Types of rock slope failures. Infinite slopes,
Circular and non-circular slip surface analysis, Stability charts. Plane
CVL708 Geotechnology of Waste Disposal Facilities failure analysis. Wedge failure analysis analytical, Stereographic
3 Credits (3-0-0) methods. Buckling and toppling failures, Rock falls, Landslides.
Integrated waste management, Detailed design of MSW Landfills Foundations: Bearing capacity, settlement and stress distribution in
and HW Landfills including individual components, Closure of Old intact and layered rocks. Foundations of dams. Deep foundations.
landfills, Expansion of old landfills, Ashponds and Tailings Ponds, Tension foundations, Codal provisions. Foundation improvement. Use
Seismic Stability; Disposal of Nuclear Waste. of appropriate software packages.
CVL709 Offshore Geotechnical Engineering CVL713 Analysis and Design of Underground Structures
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Submarine soils: Origin, nature and distribution. Terrigenic and Introduction. Types and classification of underground openings.
146

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
Factors affecting design. Design methodology. Functional aspects. Size stabilization, mitigation, Case studies.
and shapes. Support systems. Codal provisions. Analysis: Stresses and Earthquakes, tectonic stresses, creep, ground motions, damage,
deformations around openings, Stresses and deformations around prediction. Volcanic activity and hazard. Tsunamis. Case studies.
tunnels and galleries with composite lining due to internal pressure,
Thermal analysis, Thermo-mechanical analysis, thermo-hydro-
Closed form solutions, BEM, FEM. Design: Design based on analytical
mechanical analysis. Rock dynamics. Physical modelling.
methods; Empirical methods based on RSR, RMR, Q systems; Design
based on Rock support interaction analysis; Observational method-
CVD720 Major thesis part1
NATM, Convergence-confinement method. Design based on Wedge
6 Credits (0-0-12)
failure and key block analysis. Design of Shafts and hydraulic tunnels.
Stability of excavation face and Tunnel portals. Use of appropriate
software packages. CVS720 Independent Study
3 Credits (0-3-0)
CVL714 Field Exploration and Geotechnical processes
Specific to the context of the problem decided by the supervisor.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Surface and sub surface exploration methods. Aerial and remote CVL720 Air pollution and Control
sensing techniques, Geophysical methods, electrical resistivity, seismic
3 Credits (3-0-0)
refraction, applications. Rock drilling, Core samplers, Core boxes,
Air-pollution; Air Pollution Effect on Plants; Air Pollution effect on
Core orientations.
Human health; Air quality monitoring; Air Pollution Meteorology;
Logging, stratigraphic profile, scan line survey. Laboratory tests, Gaussian Plume model; Urban Air Pollution; Air Pollution from
report. Stresses in rocks. Stress anisotropy and stress ratio. Stress Industries; Air Pollution control; Air pollution indices; standards;
relief and compensation techniques, USBM, door stopper cells, flat norms; rules and regulations; Indoor Air Pollution.
jack, hydrofrac, strain rossette and dilatometers. Deformability, plate
load, pressure tunnel and bore hole tests. Strength tests, insitu CVD721 Major Thesis part-II
compression, tension and direct shear tests. Pull out tests. Borehole
12 Credits (0-0-24)
extensometers, piezometers, embedment gauges, inclinometers,
Slope indicators, packer tests for insitu permeability, Codal provisions.
CVL721 Solid Waste Engineering
Ground improvement techniques. Compaction, Grouting, Types of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
grouts, technique, Rheological models. Viscous and viscoplastic flows.
Spherical and radial flows, Shotcrete, Ground anchors, Rock bolts. Solid Wastes: Origin, Analysis, Composition and Characteristics.
Integrated Solid Waste Management System: Collection, Storage,
CVL715 Excavation Methods and Underground Space Segregation, Reuse and Recycling possibilities, Transportation,
Technology Treatment / Processing and Transformation Techniques, Final Disposal.
Management of: Municipal, Biomedical, Nuclear, Electronic and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Industrial Solid Wastes and the rules and regulations.
Principles of rock breakage, explosive energy, energy balance, blasting
mechanism. Types of explosives, initiators, delay devices, primer and CVL722 Water Engineering
booster selection. Blast hole design. Drilling methods and machines
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Blast hole timing. Pattern design, open pit and underground blasting,
Water quality parameters-conventional contaminants and emerging
production, estimation and damage criteria of ground vibrations. TBM
contaminants; Sedimentation; Coagulation and flocculation; Filtration-
tunnelling. Factors influencing and evaluation, Excavation mechanics,
mechanisms and interpretations; Ion exchange and adsorption;
Boom machines, transverse boom tunnelling machines and Robins
Disinfection; Reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, desalination.
mobile miner. Drag pick cutting, cutting tool materials and wear, disc
cutters. Case studies. Water treatment : Source selection process, selection of treatment
chain, plant siting, Treatability studies. Design of physico-chemical
Tunnels, energy storage caverns, nuclear waste disposal repositories,
unit operations.
metros, underground chambers and defence installations. Geological
considerations, layout, survey and alignment. Analysis and design
methods. Construction methods. Ventilation, provisions, equipment. CVL723 Wastewater Engineering
Control and monitoring system, services, operations and maintenance. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Lighting, specifications, maintenance, emergency lighting. Power Wastewater quality parameters, Biological processes; Microbial
supply and distribution, Water supply and distribution. Safety growth kinetics; Modeling of suspended growth systems; concepts
provisions, localized hazards, fire hazards in highway tunnels, rapid and principles of carbon oxidation, nitrification, denitrification,
transit tunnels. Surveillance and control system for highway tunnels. methanogenasis. Biological nutrient removal; Anaerobic treatment;
Tunnel finish. Attached growth reactors; decentralised wastewater treatment
systems; constructed wetlands; Design of pretreatment, secondary
CVL716 Environmental Rock Engineering
treatment, and tertiary disposal systems. Sludge stabilization,
3 Credits (3-0-0) treatment, sludge thickening, sludge drying, aerobic and anaerobic
Theory: Stress-strain behaviour of rocks and rock masses: Elastic, digestion of sludges; reliability and cost effectiveness of wastewater
elasto-plastic, and brittle, Crack phenomena and mechanisms of systems; Emerging contaminants in wastewater-treatment issues.
rock fracture.
CVL724 Environmental Systems Analysis
Temperature, pressure and water related, problems, Effect of temperature
on rock behaviour. Fluid flow through intact and fissured rocks. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Time dependent behaviour of rocks: Creep, Viscoelasticity and Introduction to natural and man-made systems. Systems modeling as
Viscoplasticity applied to environmental systems. Nature of environmental systems,
the model building process addressing to specific environmental
Continuum and discontinuum theories: Equivalent material, Block
problems. Strategies for analyzing and using environmental
and Distinct element.
systems models. Fate and transport models for contaminants in air,
Application: Waste disposal, Radioactive and hazardous wastes, water, and soil. Optimization methods (search techniques, linear
repositories, location and design, VLH, VDH and KBS3 concepts. Waste programming, non-linear programming, dynamic programming) to
container, barriers, rock structure, embedment, buffers and seals. evaluate alternatives for solid-waste management and water and air
Performance assessment, quality control and monitoring. Case histories. pollution control. Optimization over time. Integrated environmental
Hazardous Earth processes, high ground stresses, rock bursts, management strategies addressing multi-objective and multi-
subsidence. Karst formations. Landslides and rock falls, slopes stakeholder planning.
147

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
CVL725 Environmental Chemistry and Microbiology & management, water infrastructures, and irrigation and hydropower
3 Credits (1-0-4) projects; Linear programming and duality, Network flow algorithms,
Dynamic programming, Nonlinear programming, Geometric and Goal
Chemical equilibria and kinetics fundamentals; Acids and bases;
programming, Introduction to modern heuristic methods like genetic
Titrations; Acidity; Alkalinity; Buffers and buffer intensity; Chemical
algorithm and simulated annealing, Multiobjective optimization,
equilibrium calculations; pC-pH diagram; Langelier index; Solubility
Applications and case studies in water resources, agriculture,
diagram; Oxidation and reduction reactions; Cell structure; Types
environment and other areas of science & engineering.
of microorganisms in environment;metabolic classification of
organisms; laboratory procedure for determining chemical and
CVp731 Simulation Laboratory-II
microbial parameters, Introduction to advanced instruments.
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
CVD726 Minor project
Simulate hydraulic, hydrologic, pipe flow, water hammer using various
3 Credits (0-0-6) softwares such as Visual Mod Flow, SWAT, HYDRUS, Hytran, MIKE,
Bentley Software, Fluent, HMS, SAMS.
CVL727 Environmental Risk Assessment
3 Credits (3-0-0) CVL732 Groundwater Hydrology
Basic concepts of environmental risk and definitions; Human health 3 Credits (3-0-0)
risk and ecological risk assessment framework;Hazard identification
Occurrence and movement of groundwater including subsurface
procedures and hazard prioritization; Environmental risk zonation;
investigations of groundwater. Flow through saturated and
Consequence analysis and modelling (discharge models, dispersion
unsaturated media. Well Hydraulics and aquifer parameters. Pumping
models, fire and explosion models, effect models etc). Estimation
wells and their design, construction, monitoring and rehabilation of
of incident frequencies from historical data, frequency modelling
wells. Recharge of groundwater by various means. Salt water intrusion
techniques e.g., Fault tree analysis (FTA) and Event tree analysis
and coastal aquifer hydraulics. Analog and numerical models and
(ETA), Reliability block diagram. Human factors in risk analysis; Risk
application of Finite Difference method to groundwater, case studies.
management & communication. Rules, regulations and conventions.
CVL728 Environmental Quality Modeling CVL733 Stochastic Hydrology
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Plume Rise Models; Introduction to Air Quality Modelling;Turbulence Concepts of probability and Random variables; moments and
fundamentals;Basic diffusion equation; ficks law; deterministic; expectations; Common probabilistic distributions and estimation of
numerical and statistical modeling approach; Fundamentals of parameters; goodness of fit tests; Modelling of Hydrologic High and
Receptor modelling; Dispersion and receptor models; Fundamentals Low Extremes, Regional Frequency Analysis, Stochastic processes and
of Indoor air quality modelling techniques; Fundamentals of Water modelling of stochastic time series; Markov Chains and Probabilistic
quality modeling: surface water and ground water models; Fate and Theory of Reservoir Storages.
transport of Conservative and non-conservative pollutants. Modelling
as a tool for strategising pollution prevention and control. CVL734 Advanced Hydraulics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL729 Environmental Statistics and Experimental
Energy and Monument principles in open channel, Curvilinear Flows,
Design
Backwater computations, Controls, Rapidly varied flows, Spatially
3 Credits (2-0-2) varied flows, Unsteady flow, Surges, Flood wave passage, Roll waves,
Introduction on environmental data, environmental statistics Sediments transport, Incipient motion criteria, Resistance to flow
estimation (concentration, frequency of detection,minimum detection and bed forms, Bed load theory, Stratified flows, Fluvial Systems,
limit, sample size), frequency and probability distributions, inferences Industrial Hydraulics.
concerning mean and variance, confidence Interval estimation,
hypotheses test, ANOVA, regression, goodness of fit, factoral CVL735 Finite Element in Water Resources
experimentation, exceedance factor, intervention model, Case studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL730 Hydrologic processes and Modeling Introduction to finite element method, Mathematical concepts and
weighted residual techniques, Spatical discretization, Shape functions,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Isoparametric elements, Explicit and implicit time marching schemes,
Hydrologic Cycle and its individual component processes. River Basin
Equation assembly and solution techniques, Application: Navier-
as a Linear Hydrologic System. Linear Theory of Hydrologic Systems.
Stokes equations, dispersion of pollutants into ground and surface
Lumped Integral and Distributed Differential modelling approaches.
water, Flow through earthen dams, seepage beneath a hydraulic
Transform methods of Linear Systems Analysis. Morphological
structure, Groundwater flow in confined and unconfined aquifers.
attributes of watersheds and its role in runoff dynamics. Flood
Routing by Lumped Hydrologic and Distributed Hydraulic approaches.
CVL736 Soft Computing Techniques in Water Resources
Unsaturated zone Hydrology and physics of the Soil-Plant-Atmosphere
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Continuum. Calibration and Validation of Rainfall-Runoff models.
Artificial Intelligence; Expert Systems; Artificial Neural Networks:
CVp730 Simulation Laboratory-I
Introduction, Training, Applications in Hydrology; Genetic Algorithms;
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Fuzzy Logic Systems, Fuzzy Set Theory, Predictive and Descriptive
Basic of Fortran 90, Fortran 95 and computing, Numerical solution of Data Mining; Classification Methods: Decision trees, NN, Bayesian,
different types of partial differential equations: parabolic equation, ANN, SVM, Applications; Association Analysis; Cluster Analysis
elliptical equation, hyperbolic equation, Backwater curve analysis; - K-means, Fuzzy, Self-Organising maps; Anomaly detection;
Groundwater flow problems, Pipe network analysis, Unsteady Applications in Water Resources - Forecasting, Regionalization.
channel flow.
CVL737 Environmental Dynamics and Management
CVS730 Minor project (CEW)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Environmental property and processes, Environmental simulation
models, Elements of environmental impact analysis, Impact
CVL731 Optimization Techniques in Water Resources
assessment methodologies, Framework of environmental assessment,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Environmental impact of water resources projects, Assessment of
Optimization techniques commonly used in water resources planning hydrological hazards, Environmental management, Case studies.
148

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
CVL738 Economic Aspects of Water Resources CVL744 Transportation Infrastructure Design
Development 3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
Economics of water and development, Basic economic concepts, Transportation infrastructure: components, structural and functional
Financial analysis of a project, Pricing concepts, Benefit-cost- requirements, capacity, level of service; Highway infrastructure: grade
sensitivity analysis, Capital budgeting and cost allocation, Economics intersections, rotaries, interchanges; Railway infrastructure: trackbed
of natural resources management, Hydro economic model, Hydro- design, grade-crossing design, embankment, retaining walls; Drainage
economic risk assessment, Economics of river restoration, Economics infrastructure: culverts, bridges; Pedestrian infrastructure: pedestrian
of trans-boundary water resources management. sideways, foot bridges; Miscellaneous: bus and truck terminals,
parking facilities, guard rails, tunnels, underpasses;.
CVL740 pavement Materials and Design of pavements
4 Credits (3-0-2) CVL745 Modeling of pavement Materials
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
Components of pavement structure and its requirements; Materials Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
used in pavement construction: aggregate, Portland cement, asphalt, Role of constitutive modeling; Laboratory testing in relation to
Portland cement concrete, asphalt concrete; Aggregates: production, constitutive modeling: elastic modulus, resilient modulus, complex
properties, testing procedures, gradation and blending; Portland modulus, creep, rheological tests; Introduction to continuum
cement based materials: mixture design, production, properties, mechanics: strain tensor, stress tensor, isotropy, anisotropy,
testing, construction; Asphalt binder: refining process, properties, constitutive relationships; Factors affecting material behavior:
testing procedures, grading systems; Asphalt concrete mixture temperature, rate, time, confining pressure; Unbound materials:
design: fundamentals of mix design procedure, mixture volumetrics, soil, aggregate; Bound materials: binding using asphalt, water, lime,
current mix design procedures; Production and construction practices; polymer, fly ash, cement; Constitutive models: unbound materials,
Stresses and strains in pavement system: traffic, environment bound materials; Field performance of pavement materials: fatigue,
considerations; Design of pavements: new, overlay; Pavement rutting, temperature issues, moisture damage, permeability; Transfer
performance; Drainage consideration. functions to relate laboratory performance with field performance.
CVL741 Urban and Regional Transportation planning CVL746 public Transportation Systems
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
Fundamentals of transportation planning. Components of This course discusses the role of urban public transportation modes,
transportation system and their interaction. Historical development focusing on bus and rail systems. Operational and Technological
and current status of techniques used in travel demand forecasting; characteristics are described, along with their impacts on capacity,
Economic Theory of travel demand forecasting; trip generation, trip service quality, and cost. Current practice and methods for data
distribution, mode choice, traffic assignment models. Integration collection and analysis, performance evaluation, route and network
of landuse transport models. Comparison and evaluation of various design, frequency determination, and vehicle and crew scheduling
models. Simultaneous travel demand models: Parameter Estimation are covered. Main topics include: Transit System; Estimation of
and Validation. Travel Data collection and use of surveys. The Transit Demand; Route planning techniques; Bus Scheduling; Transit
role of transportation planning in the overall regional system. Corridor identification and planning; Mass Transport Management
Methodology and models for regional transportation system, Measures; Integration of Public Transportation Modes. Public transport
planning, implementation framework and case studies. Applications Infrastructure; Case Studies. Multimodal Transportation Systems.
to passenger and freight movement in urban area. Implications for
CVL747 Transportation Safety and Environment
policy formulations and analysis.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL742 Traffic Engineering Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
4 Credits (3-0-2) Scientific management techniques in planning, implementing, and
evaluating highway safety programs, strategies to integrate and
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
amplify safety in transportation planning processes., multidisciplinary
Introductory concepts of traffic engineering, road user and vehicle
relationships necessary to support effective traffic safety initiatives.
characteristics, Road way geometric characteristics, traffic stream
Traffic Safety as public health problem, Injury indices and costing
characteristics, and traffic flow theory basics. Statistical applications
, emergency care, pollution inventory in urban areas, environment
in traffic engineering. Traffic data collection methods - speed, volume,
and safety standards.
travel time and delay studies. Parking studies. Highway safety and
statistics. Capacity analysis of freeway and multilane highways -
CVL750 Intelligent Transportation Systems
fundamental concepts, freeway segment analysis, two-way highways.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Intersections concepts of intersection control, intersection layout,
signalization basics, signal timing. Analysis of signals and coordination Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
under undersaturated and oversaturated conditions. Introduction to Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS); ITS
Organizational Issues, the fundamental concepts of Intelligent
CVL743 Airport planning and Design Transportation Systems (ITS) to students with interest in engineering,
3 Credits (3-0-0) transportation systems, communication systems, vehicle technologies,
transportation planning, transportation policy, and urban planning.
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: Nil; B.Tech: Instructor's permission
ITS in transportation infrastructure and vehicles, that improve
Overview of air transport; Forecasting demand-passenger, freight; transportation safety, productivity, environment, and travel reliability.
Aircraft characteristics; Airport planning-requirements site selection, Mobile device applications of ITS such as trip planners, ETA s of
layout plan; Geometric design of runway, taxiway and aprons; Airport public transit vehicles.
capacity-airside, landside; Passenger terminal-functions, passenger
and baggage flow; Airport pavement design and drainage; Parking CVD753 Minor project in Transportation Engineering
and apron design; Air cargo facilities; Air traffic control lighting and
3 Credits (0-0-6)
signing; Airport safety; Environmental impact of airports; Airport
financing and economic analysis. Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech.: Nil
149

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
CVS754 Independent Study CVL759 Structural Dynamics
3 Credits (0-0-6) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Instructor's permission Theory of structural dynamics and vibration analysis. Free and forced
vibration of single degree of freedom (SDOF) systems, load regimes
CVD756 Minor project in Structural Engineering and response to harmonic, periodic, impulsive, and general dynamic
loading. Response of SDOF to earthquake and response spectrum
3 Credits (0-0-6)
concept. Damping in structures and its evaluation. Free and forced
The course content will be decided by the concerned faculty member
vibration of lumped multi degree of freedom (MDOF) structures.
(supervisor) who will be assigning the research project to the students
Methods for obtaining natural frequencies and mode shapes. Normal
registered for this course.
mode theory; mode combination rules; dynamic response evaluation.
Force excited and base excited dynamical systems. Time domain
CVL756 Advanced Structural Analysis
analysis using numerical integration scheme. Free and forced vibration
3 Credits (3-0-0) of continuous systems. Frequency domain analysis of dynamical
Matrix methods for 3-D skeletal structures: force and displacement systems. Introduction to advanced topics in structural dynamics.
methods including analysis using substructures, static condensation.
CVL760 Theory of Concrete Structures
Computational aspects including in plane rigidity of slab, non-prismatic
members, and shear deformation effects. Non-linear analysis: second 3 Credits (3-0-0)
order and elastoplastic analysis. Energy approaches. Analysis of plates Introduction: Historical developments, Material properties;
and singly curved shells. Cracked concrete members under flexural moment and axial force;
Deformations and collapse; M-P interaction. Beams without stirrups
CVp756 Structural Engineering Laboratory under flexural and torsional shear: Morsch and Regan theories; Skew-
3 Credits (0-0-6) bending theory. Beams with stirrups under flexural and torsional
Concrete: Concrete mix-design Evaluation of stress-strain response shear: Plane and space truss analogies, Modified compression field
of plain, self-compacting and high-performance concrete; Behaviour theory, Unified theory, P-M-V-T interaction; Strut and tie model;
of RC members under axial, flexure, shear torsion, and interaction; Cracking: Bond slip, Development length, Tension stiffening, Durability
Behavior of slabs, Non-destructing testing. Response of structures detailing; Serviceability: Elastic, creep and shrinkage deformations;
and its elements against extreme loading events. Model testing: Elastic analysis: Redistribution of moments; Plastic analysis: Inelastic
Models of plates, shells, and frames; Free and forced vibrations; and hysteretic behaviour, Limit design, Confined concrete: Ductility
Evaluation of dynamic modulus; Beam vibrations; Vibration isolation; detailing requirements; Buckling of columns; Concrete slabs: Yield
Shear wall building model; Time and frequency-domain study. Smart line theory, Strip Theory; Reliability and safety: Limit state design
materials; Photogrammetry for Displacement Measurement; Vibration method, Target reliability; Current trends: Constitutive modelling,
Characteristics of RC Beams using Piezoelectric Sensors etc. Capacity design, Finite element analysis.
CVL761 Theory of Steel Structures
CVS756 Independent Study (CES)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Structural steel: Classifications, Grades, Behavioural characteristics,
Course content will be decided by the concerned faculty member of
Plasticity and hardening; Material models: Simple, Rigid, Power
structural engineering. function, Smooth hysteretic; Design methodology: Allowable, Limit
state, Ultimate; Methods of analysis including second-order effects;
CVD757 Major project part-I (CES)
Plastic design: Plate instabilities, Local buckling, Section classifications;
9 Credits (0-0-18) Structural stability: Global buckling, Member and frames under axial
and combined loading; Sway and non-sway frames; Design of
Pre-requisite(s): programme core Credits+minimum 24 credits
members under combined bending, shear and torsion; Connections:
Simple, Semi-rigid, Rigid; Plates girders: Simple post-critical theory,
CVL757 Finite Element Methods in Structural Engg.
Tension-field theory, Section design, Stiffener requirements; Gantry
3 Credits (2-0-2)
girder; Grillage foundation; Earthquake-resistant design and detailing;
Review of principles of virtual work and minimum potential energy. Fire-resistant design; Fatigue-resistant design.
Elements of theory of elasticity. Finite element (FE) techniques
for linear and static problems. Developing various types of finite CVL762 Earthquake Analysis and Design
elements: 1-D, 2-D, and 3-D. Formulating displacement and shape 3 Credits (3-0-0)
functions. Variational and weighted residual techniques. Higher Seismology; Seismic Risk and Hazard; Soil Dynamics and Seismic
order/ isoparametric formulation for truss, beam, frame, plate, and Inputs to Structures; Response Spectrum Analysis (RSA); Special
shell elements. Numerical solution procedures and computational Analysis; Nonlinear and Push-Over Analysis; Dynamic Soil-Structure
aspects. Applications to structures such as dams, frames, shear Interaction (SSI); Earthquake Resistant Design Philosophy;
walls, grid floors, rafts etc. Algorithms for FE problem solving and Performance Based Earthquake Engineering; Code Provisions for
commercial software modeling issues. Application of FE methods to Seismic Design of Structures; Retrofitting and Strengthening of
solve thermal problems. Structures; Concept of Base Isolation Design and Structural Vibration
Control; Advanced Topics in Earthquake Engineering.
CVD758 Major project part-II (CES)
9 Credits (0-0-18) CVL763 Analytical and Numerical Methods for Structural
Engineering
Pre-requisite(s): CVD757 must be passed
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL758 Solid Mechanics in Structural Engineering Introduction: Mathematical foundations of structural theory. Linear
algebra: vector spaces and linear transformations. Linear differential
3 Credits (3-0-0)
equations and function spaces. Partial differential equations; Elliptic,
Pre-requisite(s): UG/Dual- 120 credits parabolic and hyperbolic PDEs. Nonlinear differential equations.
Introduction; Historical developments; Theory of stress; Kinematics; Gaussian Elimination; Factorization Techniques - LU, Cholesky;
Isotropic/ anisotropic linear elastic solids; Axioms of constitutive Iterative Methods of Solution of Linear Simultaneous Equations.
equations; Finite isotropic elasticity; Hypo/ hyperelasticity; Hardening Properties of Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors; Similarity Transforms;
plasticity; Viscoelasticity; Boundary Value Problems (BVPs); Plane Diagonalization and Numerical Techniques to Compute Eigenvalues
elasticity; Polar coordinates; Torsion and bending of prismatic bars - Vector Iteration, QR algorithm, Jacobi Method. Time Marching
with general section; Elastic wave propagation; Current trends. Schemes (Step by Step Solutions); Euler’s Method; Runge Kutta
150

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
Method; Newmark Beta Method. Numerical Solution of Boundary CVL769 Design of Tall Buildings
Value Problems - Finite Difference Method, Explicit and Implicit 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Approaches; Method of Weighted Residuals, Galerkin’s Method.
Structural systems and general concepts of tall buildings; Various
Numerical Integration: Gauss- Legendre Method, Newton-Cotes
methods of structural analysis; Gravity systems for steel, concrete,
Method. Regression Analysis and Curve Fitting. Applications of
and composite buildings; Lateral systems for steel, concrete,
mathematical and numerical methods to static, dynamic and stability
and composite buildings; Interaction of frames and shear walls;
analysis of elastic structures and cables.
Simultaneous and sequential loading; Differential shortening of
CVL764 Blast Resistant Design of Structures columns; P-Δ effects; Effect of openings; Foundations and foundation-
superstructure interaction; Wind/ earthquake effects and design
3 Credits (2-0-2)
for ductility; Damping systems; Asymmetric structures and twisting
Blast Engineering: Explosion Phenomena, Shock Front, Fragmentation,
of frames.
Waves, Ground Shock, and Interaction with Structures; Structural
Analysis for Impulsive Loading; Pressure-Impulse (PI) Diagrams; CVL770 prestressed and Composite Structures
Material Behaviour under High Strain-Rate of Loadings; Blast Resistant 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Design of Structures; Performance-Based Blast Design; Progressive
Introduction; Need, Advantages, and Disadvantages; High Strength
Collapse; Anti-Terrorism Planning and Design of Facilities; Blast
Materials; Pretensioning and Post-Tensioning Methods; Prestressing
Retrofitting; Indian/ International Standards and Codes of Practice;
Methods; Prestressing Systems and Devices; Camber, Deflections,
Numerical Analysis Tools for Blast Analysis using Finite Element (FE)
and Cable Profiles/ Layouts; Load-Balancing; Codes and Standards;
Software and Hydrocodes.
Prestressed Concrete Members - Flexure, Shear, Torsion Behaviors;
CVL765 Concrete Mechanics Design Methods and Code Provisions; Strain Compatibility Method;
Pressure/ Thrust Line; Pre-Tensioning; Grouted/ Bonded and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Ungrouted/ Unbonded Post-Tensioning; Partial Prestressing; Bursting
Introduction; Rheological modelling of fresh concrete; Flowing Stresses; Anchorage Zone (End Block Design); Transmission and
concrete; Mechanics of hardened concrete: Failure criteria; Transfer Length; De-Bonding and Draping of Prestressing Tendons;
Constitutive equations; Elasto-plasticity, visco-elasticity, fatigue, Camber, Deflection, and Ductility; External Prestressing; De-
damage mechanics and fracture; Mechanics of hydrating concretes, Compression; Losses in Prestress; Bearing and Bond Stresses; Case
Durability Mechanics, Transport processes; Drying shrinkage; Studies of Prestressed Concrete Bridge Design and Practices.
Micromechanics , Numerical and analytical homogenisation,
Need of Composite Construction; Analysis of Indeterminate and
poromechanics , Crystalline growths and internal microstresses.
Composite Structures; Design Methods for Composite Beams, Slabs,
CVL766 Design of Bridge Structures Columns, Box-girders, Shear Studs etc.
3 Credits (3-0-0) CVC771 Seminar in Construction Technology and
Introduction, historical/ magnificent bridges; Site Selection, Planning, Management-I
and Type of Bridges, Loads and Forces; Code Provisions for Design
0 Credit (0-0-2)/Compulsory Audit
of Steel and Concrete Bridges; Analysis Methods, Grillage Analogy;
Theories of Lateral Load Distribution and Design of Superstructure:
CVD771 Minor project (CEC)
Slab Type, Beam-Slab, and Box Type; Distribution of Externally
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Applied and Self-Induced Horizontal Forces among Bridge Supports in
Straight, Curved, and Skewed Decks; Continuous Type and Balanced
CVL771 Advanced Concrete Technology
Cantilever Type Superstructure; Temperature Stresses in Concrete
Bridge Deck; Different Types of Foundations: Open, Pile, and Well 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Foundations; Choice of Foundation for Abutments and Piers; Design Hydration of cements and microstructural development, Mineral
of Abutments, Piers, Pile/ Pier Caps; Effect of Differential Settlement additives, Chemical admixtures, Rheology of concrete, Creep and
of Supports; Bridge Bearings; Expansion Joints for Bridge Decks; relaxation, Shrinkage, cracking and volume stability, deterioration
Vibration of Bridge Decks; Parapet and Railings for Highway Bridges; processes, special concretes, Advanced characterisation techniques,
Construction Methods; Segmental Construction of Bridges; Inspection sustainability issues in concreting, Modelling properties of concrete.
and Maintenance of Bridges; Health Monitoring and Evaluation of
Existing Bridges; Bridge Failure: Case Studies. CVp771 Construction Technology Laboratory
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
CVL767 Design of Fiber Reinforced Composite Structures
Tests related to quality control at site, in-situ tests, tests related to damage
3 Credits (3-0-0) and deterioration assessment, performance monitoring of structures.
Introduction; Types of structural fibers: matrix, fiber and interface;
Fiber reinforced concrete (FRC); High-performance concrete; CVS771 Independent Study (CEC)
Stress transfer, Bond, Pull-out, Toughening mechanism; Fracture 3 Credits (0-0-6)
mechanics; Modeling of tensile and flexural behaviours; Behaviour
under compression; Shear failure theory; Behaviour under seismic CVC772 Seminar in Construction Technology and
loading; Composite structural design: Design spirals, Selection Criteria Management-II
configurations; Laminate design; Mathematical analysis of laminates;
0 Credit (0-0-2)/Compulsory Audit
Design of single skin panels, Design of composite stiffeners.
CVL768 Design of Masonry Structures CVD772 Major project part-I (CEC)
3 Credits (3-0-0) 9 Credits (0-0-18)
Introduction and Historical Perspective; Masonry Materials; Masonry
CVL772 Construction project Management
Design Approaches; Overview of Load Conditions; Compression
Behavior of Masonry; Masonry Wall Configurations; Distribution of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Lateral Forces; Flexural Strength of Reinforced Masonry Members: Introduction to construction project management - CPM, PERT, PDM,
In-plane and Out-of-plane Loading, Interactions; Structural Wall; LOB. Scope management, WBS, PDRI. Time and cost management,
Columns and Pilasters; Retaining Wall; Pier and Foundation; Shear material related management - purchase & inventory control, time-
Strength and Ductility of Reinforced Masonry Members; Prestressed cost-resource optimization, quality, safety - planning & control.
Masonry; Stability of Walls; Coupling of Masonry Walls, Openings, Labor productivity variations, productivity improvement - work study.
Columns, Beams; Elastic and inelastic analysis; Modelling Techniques; Measuring project progress & performance - EVA & ES. Identification
Static Push-Over Analysis and use of Capacity Design Spectra. of risks and impact. Management Information systems.
151

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
CVp772 Computational Laboratory for Construction CVL777 Building Science
Management 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Introduction to environmental features relevant to functional design.
Introduction to construction project models - analytical and numerical. Their measures description and quantification. Periodic nature of
Application software for project planning, scheduling & control. variation of environmental descriptors. Heat exchange of building
Programming exercises for estimation, network planning and control, with environment under diurnal periodic variation temperature and
LP in construction. modelling. Estimation of hourly internal temperature through CIBS
MATLAB Programming in linear and non-linear programming. method. Thermal Design philosophy and optimization for decision
variables such as shape, orientation, envelope properties etc. Purpose
CVD773 Major project part-II (CEC) of ventilation, wind and stack effect as driving force. Design for
12 Credits (0-0-24) desired flow and indoor velocity. Fundamentals of acoustics, Sound
ion free field and enclosure. External and Internal air borne noise
CVL773 Quantitative Methods in Construction control. Protection against structure borne noise. Lighting principles
Management and daylighting. Day light factor, and design for desired illumination
and glare free lighting.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction and concepts of probability and statistics, Linear CVD778 Major project part-II (CET)
programming, Transportation and assignment problems. Dynamic 12 Credits (0-0-24)
programming, Queuing theory, Decision theory, Games theory.
Simulations applied to construction, Modifications and improvement
CVL778 Building Services and Maintenance Management
on CPM/PERT techniques.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL774 Construction Contract Management
Concepts of functional design of building for fire protection,
3 Credits (3-0-0) design of lift systems for optimum service. Building service system
Professional Ethics, Duties and Responsibilities of Parties. Owner’s design. Control and intelligent buildings, HVAC, hot and cold water
and contractor’s estimate, Bidding Models and Bidding Strategies, services, waste water handling system, electrical services, building
Qualification of Bidders. Tendering and Contractual procedures, maintenance management.
Indian Contract Act 1872, Definition of Contract and its Applicability,
CVL779 Formwork for Concrete Structures
Types of Contracts, Clauses in Domestic and International Contracts
- CPWD, MES, FIDIC, AIA, NEC, JCT, etc. Contract Administration, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Delay Protocol, Change Orders Analysis, Claim Management and Requirements and selection for Formwork , Formwork Materials,
Compensation, Disputes and Resolution Techniques, Arbitration and such as Timber, Plywood, Steel, Aluminum Form, Plastic Forms, and
Conciliation Act 1996, Arbitration Case Studies. Accessories, Horizontal and Vertical Formwork Supports; Formwork
Design Concepts, Illustration of Formwork system for Foundations,
CVL775 Construction Economics and Finance
walls, columns, slab and beams and their design, Formwork for Shells,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Domes, Folded Plates, Overhead Water Tanks, Natural Draft Cooling
Engineering economics, Time value of money, discounted cash flow, Tower. Formwork for Bridge Structures, Flying Formwork such as
NPV, ROR, PI. Basis of comparison, Incremental rate of return, Benefit- Table form, Tunnel form. Slipform, Formwork for Precast Concrete,
cost analysis, Replacement analysis, Break even analysis. Depreciation Formwork Management Issues pre award and post award, Formwork
and amortization. Taxation and inflation, Evaluation of profit before and failures-causes and Case Studies in Formwork Failure, Formwork
after tax. Risks and uncertainties and management decision in capital issues in multi-story building construction.
budgeting. Working capital management, financial plan and multiple
CVD800 Major project part-I
source of finance. Budgeting and budgetary control, Performance
budgeting. Profit & Loss, Balance Sheet, Income statement, Ratio 6 Credits (0-0-12)
analysis, Appraisal through financial statements, International finance,
forward, futures and swap. Practical problems and case studies. CVL800 Emerging Topics in Geotechnical Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVD776 Minor project (CET)
A course which will vary from year to year to study new and
3 Credits (0-0-6) exciting developments in the broad spectrum of Geotechnical and
Geoenvironmental Engineering. The course will also focus on new
CVL776 Construction practices and Equipment
offshoots of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVp800 Geoenvironmental and Geotechnical Engg. Lab
Form work design and scaffolding, slipform and other moving forms,
Shoring, Reshoring, and Backshoring in multistoreyed Building 3 Credits (0-0-6)
construction. Engineering properties and compaction characteristics of waste - coal
Prestressing, Steel and composites construction methods: Fabrication ash, mine tailings. Permeability of clays and bentonite amended soils.
and erection of structures including heavy structures, Prefab Physical, Mechanical and Hydraulic Testing of Geosynthetics Landfill
construction, Industrialized construction, Modular coordination. liner and cover: Evaluation of shear strength parameters of various
Special construction methods: High rise construction, Bridge Interfaces and design. Project based laboratory for evaluation of
construction including segmental construction, incremental engineering properties of soils for design of embankments.
construction and push launching techniques.
CVS800 Independent Study
Factors affecting selection of equipment - technical and economic,
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Analysis of production outputs and costs, Characteristics and
performances of equipment for major civil engineering activities such
CVD801 Major project part-II
as Earth moving, erection, material transport, pile driving, Dewatering,
and Concreting. 12 Credits (0-0-24)
CVS776 Independent Study (CET) CVL801 Constitutive Modelling in Geotechnics
3 Credits (0-0-6) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction: fundamental relations, models and soil mechanics.
CVD777 Major project part-I (CET) Elasticity: Isotropic, anisotropic, soil elasticity. Failure criteria for soils.
9 Credits (0-0-18) Plasticity and yielding: yielding of clays, yielding of sands, slip line
152

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
fields, introduction to upper and lower bounds, selected boundary CVL820 Environmental impact assessment
value problems. Elasto-plastic model for soils: elastic volumetric 3 Credits (3-0-0)
strains, plastic volumetric strains, plastic hardening, plastic shear
Planning and Management of Environmental Impact Studies. Impact
strains, plastic potentials, flow rule. Cam clay model: critical state
indentation methodologies: base line studies, screening, scoping,
line, shear strength, stress-dilatancy, index properties, prediction of
checklist, networks, overlays. Prediction and assessment of impacts
conventional soil tests. Applications.
on the socio-economic environment. Environmental cost benefit
CVD810 Major project part-I (CEU) analysis. Decision methods for evaluation of alternatives. Case
Studies. Environmental impact assessment at project level, regional
6 Credits (0-0-12)
level, sectoral level, and policy level. Sustainable development;
Environmental policy in planned, mixed and market economies.
CVL810 Emerging Topics in Rock Engineering and
Preventive environmental management.
Underground Structures
3 Credits (3-0-0) CVp820 Advanced Air pollution Laboratory
Advanced and state-of-the-art rock engineering topics. 3 Credits (1-0-4)
Monitoring of TSP using HVS, Monitoring of PM2.5 using cyclone
CVp810 Rock Mechanics Laboratory-II based sampler, Size segregated particle collection and data analysis
3 Credits (0-0-6) using histogram, inversion program, Personal exposure assessment,
determination of count and geometric mean diameter, determination
Pre-requisite(s): Rock Mechanics Lab-I CVP710
of chemical species in air samples, Determination of emission factors
Project planning,Schedule and cost assessment,DPR and GD for of particle and gases for combustion sources, Determination of TVOC;
Major projects,Field visit, Sample collection, Scanline survey and Determination of indoor air quality parameters, determination of
seismic survey, Rock characterization, Determination of physical and Bioaerosol; Monitoring and analysis of meteorological parameters.
mechanical properties of rocks, Analysis of slopes using GEOSLOPE
and Analysis of tunnels using Phase2, both using the material CVL821 Industrial Waste Management and Audit
properties determined through laboratory tests. Design of slopes 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and tunnels.
Industrial Wastes: Nature and characteristics, Prevention and Control,
Tools for clean processes: reuse, recycle, recovery, source reduction,
CVS810 Independent Study (CEU)
raw material substitution, process modification, Flow sheet analysis,
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Energy and resources audit, Waste audit, emission inventory and
waste management hierarchy for process industries, Zero discharge,
CVD811 Major project part-II (CEU)
Environmental indicators, Industrial ecology and ecoparks, rules and
12 Credits (0-0-24) regulations, Case studies: Dairy, Fertilizer, Distillery, Pulp and Paper,
Iron and steel, Metal plating, Refineries, Thermal power plants, etc.
CVL811 Numerical and Computer Methods in
Geomechanics CVp821 Advanced Water and Wastewater Laboratory
3 Credits (2-0-2) 3 Credits (1-0-4)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL704 or Equivalent Principles of instrumentation and application for water quality
parameters measurements, Operation of batch scale models for
Introduction to Numerical Methods, ODEs, PDEs, Equation solution
various processes: Activated sludge process, Disinfection, Settlers,
techniques, Root finding techniques, Fourier Series, Types of
Coagulation,Filtration, Anaerobic digestion, Adsorption. Design
geotechnical boundary value problems, Numerical modeling,
and operation of treatability studies and microbial growth kinetics,
Numerical solution schemes, pros and cons, Programming tools-
microbial toxicity and bioaccumulation studies. Micropollutants
FORTRAN, MATLAB, MATHCAD, Development of programming
detection;Package programmes for water and wastewater
flowchart.
conveyance, treatment and disposal.
Simplified and advanced constitutive models and their calibration:
Elastic Models, Elasto-plastic Models, Formulation of Elasto-Plastic
CVL822 Emerging Technologies for Environmental
Stiffness Matrix, Governing equations of elastoplasticity, Rock and
Management
Soil constitutive models.
Integration of stress-strain equations, Concepts of verification and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
validation, Selection of model input parameters, Integration of load- Contemporary micro and macro environmental issues of importance,
displacement relations, Integration of seepage, consolidation and global environmental and resource sharing issues, international
heat conduction equations, Sturm–Liouville problem, Solution of treaties and protocols. Emerging contaminants and emerging
seepage, consolidation, heat conduction and Sturm-Liouville equations technologies for waste management, Case studies of environmental
using finite difference and finite element programming methods, pollution and innovative management strategies. Environmental
Comparison with commercially available software results. technology transfer, Non-conventional Energy, Emission trading,
Adaptation to climate change.
CVL818 Design of plates and Shells (pG)
CVL823 Thermal Techniques for Waste Management
3 Credits (2-1-0)
Prismatic folded plate systems. Shell equations. Approximate 3 Credits (3-0-0)
solutions. Analysis and design of cylindrical shells. Approximate design Fundamentals of Thermodynamics, Heat Transfer and Combustion as
methods for doubly curved shells. applied to Waste Incineration. Introduction to fuels, reactor design,
fluidization engineering and furnace technology. Combustion of
CVL819 Concrete Mechanics (pG) gaseous, liquid and solid fuels. Wastes as fuels. Low, medium and
3 Credits (3-0-0) high temperature thermal treatment techniques, Energy recovery,
pollution control techniques for thermal facilities, Design of thermal
Introduction; Rheological modelling of fresh concrete; Constitutive
treatment facilities with pollution control devices.
equations; Nonlinear elasticity, plasticity, visco-elasticity and fracture
mechanics of hardened concrete; Confinement and ductility; Moisture
CVL824 Life Cycle Analysis and Design for Environment
diffusion; Drying shrinkage; Solid and structural mechanics of
reinforced concrete, Skew bending, modified compression field and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
unified theories of R.C. beams under bending, shear and torsion; Engineering products and processes : Environmental health and safety,
Bond-slip and phenomenon of cracking in reinforced concrete; Statical Product life cycle stages, Material toxicity, pollution, and degradation,
and dynamical analysis of R.C. Structures; Trends. Environmentally conscious design and manufacturing approaches,
153

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Sustainable development and industrial ecology. System life-cycles evaluation, Unsaturated zone properties: Soil moisture levels,
from cradle to reincarnation, Product life-extension, Organizational Retention curves, Flow through unsaturated porous media, Multiphase
issues. Pollution prevention practices, Manufacturing process selection flows, infiltration and Wetting front, Groundwater contamination,
and trade-offs. Design for Environment : Motivation, concerns, Sources and causes of groundwater pollution, Pollution dynamics,
definitions, examples, guidelines, methods, and tools. Recyclability Hydrodynamics dispersion, Adsorption, Biodegradation, Radioactive
assessments, Design for recycling practices. Re- manufacturability decay, Reactive processes, Multiphase contamination, NAPLs,
assessments, Design for Remanufacture / Reuse practices. Industrial VOCs, Site specific groundwater quality problems in Indian context,
ecology and Eco-industrial parks. Eco-Labels and Life-Cycle analysis Numerical models, Finite difference methods, Numerical modeling
(LCA): LCA methodology, steps, tools and problems, Life-Cycle of steady and transient flows in saturated and unsaturated domain,
Accounting and Costing. ISO 14000 Environmental Management Contaminant transport modeling, Application of FEM and BIEM in
Standards. New business paradigms and associated design practices. groundwater modeling, Regional aquifer simulation, Contaminated
groundwater systems and their rehabilitation, Development and
CVL825 Fundamental of Aerosol: Health and Climate optimization based management of aquifer systems, Stochastic
Change models, Random field concepts in groundwater models; Application
of emerging techniques to groundwater management.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will introduce the students with fundamentals of aerosols,
CVS830 Independent Study (CEW)
Difference in gas and particle motion in the air, physio-chemical
3 Credits (0-3-0)
and optical properties of individual and mixed particles, behaviour
of non-spherical particles, thermodynamic properties of aerosol,
CVD831 Major project part-I
particle formation, application of aerosol fundamentals and properties
in research and industries, impact of aerosol properties on indoor/ 6 Credits (0-0-12)
outdoor air quality, health and climate.
CVL831 Surface Water Quality Modeling and Control
CVL826 Quantitative microbial risk assessment 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0) River hydrology and derivation of Stream Equation, Derivation of
Pathogens, Occurrence and fate in environment, Human exposure Estaury equation, Distribution of water quality in rivers and estuaries.
pathways, Microbial exposure dose estimation, Infection and Physical and Chemical characteristics of Lakes, Finite Difference
dose-response modeling, Risk of infection estimation,Uncertainty steady state river, estaury and Lake models., Dissolved Oxygen
estimation. models in rivers, estuaries and Lakes, Fate of Indicator Bacteria and
pathogens in water bodies. Basic Mechanism of Eutrophication, Lake
CVL827 Environmental Implications of Engineered phytoplankton models, eutophication in rivers and estuaries. Elements
Nanomaterials of Toxic substance analysis.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
CVD832 Major project part-II
Engineered nanomateials, Occurrence of nanomaterials in 12 Credits (0-0-24)
environment, Fate of nanomaterials in environment, Exposure
pathways-model development and parameter estimation,Dose- CVL832 Hydroelectric Engineering
response effects of nanomaterials to humans and aquatic species;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
dose-response modeling and risk estimation of nanomaterials
Hydropower development schemes and their various configurations,
exposures; Risk management of nanomaterials pollution; Prioritization
Planning for firm Capacities, Peak Load and Base Load configurations,
of nanomaterials for monitoring; Regulatory guidelines for implications
Role of and Regulation of Hydropower development in a mixed hydro-
assessment and pollution regulations; Emerging challenges for long-
steam system, Governing of Hydropower systems; study of hydraulic
term management of nanomaterials exposure.
transients in Penstocks. Surge analysis and dynamics of Surge tanks.
Micro hydro power developments.
CVL828 Water Distribution and Sewerage Network Design
3 Credits (3-0-0) CVV832 Approaches for Contaminated Site
Planning for water supply sources and demand assessment. Water Characterization
demand forecasting. Types of water distribution systems. Intermittent
1 Credit (0.8-0.2-0)
and continuous water supply systems. Design and analysis of Water
The course will effectively present a sync between the formalization
mains. Design and analysis of water distribution system. Analysis of
of groundwater contamination problem with the interplay of data
water deficient systems. Optimal design of water distribution systems.
requirements, to be obtained from site characterization, and
On-line monitoring of water quality parameters. Retrofitting of the
mathematical modelling. For this, in the course modeling approached
existing water supply systems.
and geophysical methods from a very bare fundamentals and up
Planning for wastewater conveyance system in urban areas. Combined
to the recent most development will be presented. Subsequently,
and separate systems for storm and sewage. Design and analysis
the usefulness and criticality of quality field-data and modeling
of wastewater conveyance system. Optimal design of wastewater
methods will be explored with a goal of an efficient contaminated site
conveyance systems. Operation and maintenance issues. Retrofitting
management. Implementations of field data and numerical methods
of the sewerage system.
will be discussed using simple to very complex case-studies.
CVL829 Indoor Environmental Quality: Theory and CVL833 Water Resources Systems
practice
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Water Resources Planning Purposes and Objectives, Multi-component,
The course will provide the students with the fundamentals of indoor multi-user, multi-objective and multi-purpose attributes of an
environmental quality, factors affecting IEQ (temperature, humidity, Integrated Water Resources System, Economic basis for selection
ventilation, lighting, noise, air quality), methods for measuring, of a Plan Alternative.
assessing and control of IEQ, bioaerosols in indoor environment, Introduction to Linear Programming and applications in Water
standards and guidelines, case studies and best practices in IAQ. Resources Engineering.
Irrigation Planning and Operation Models, Linear, Deterministic
CVL830 Groundwater Flow and pollution Modeling
Integrated Water Resources Management Model on River Basin Scale,
3 Credits (3-0-0) River Basin Scale Integrated Stochastic Water Resources Planning
Subsurface processes and concepts for groundwater resources and Management Models.
154

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
CVL834 Urban Water Infrastructure CVL838 Geographic Information Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Urban water cycle, Urban water infrastructures - water supply, storm What is GIS. Geographic concepts for GIS. Spatial relationships,
water drainage, sanitation, sewerage and wastewater conveyance topology, spatial patterns, spatial interpolation. Data storage, data
infrastructures, Water supply and sewerage network hydraulics, structure, non-spatial database models. Populating GIS, digitizing,
SCADA systems, Sustainable urban designs, Methodologies for data conversion. Spatial data models, Raster and Vector data
assessing sustainability of urban water infrastructures, Emerging structures and algorithms. Digital Elevation Models (DEM) and their
sustainable materials and design procedures for water supply and application. Georeferencing and projection systems, GIS application
sewerage pipelines, Hydraulic performance and structural strength, areas, Spatial analysis, quantifying relationships, spatial statistics,
chemical resistance and resilience characteristics of emerging spatial search.
materials based water and sewer pipelines, Rehabilitation and
augmentation technologies for water supply and sewerage networks, CVL839 Hydrologic Applications of Remote Sensing
Analytic hierarchy process and optimization techniques for arriving
3 Credits (2-0-2)
at the best appropriate rehabilitation / augmentation technology,
Principles of remote sensing, Remote sensing platforms and data
Urban water management, Rain water harvesting, Managed aquifer
acquisition systems, Wavebands, Radiometric quantities, Spectral
recharge, Constructed/engineered wetlands, Sprinkler and drip
reflectance and spectral signature, Interaction of electromagnetic
irrigation, Water use efficiencies, Effect of water management
radiation with land surface features, hydrosphere and atmosphere,
practices on urban water infrastructure, hydrology and groundwater
Data capture for simulation of land surface processes, Photographic
regime, Surface and subsurface mapping of water supply and
and image interpretation, Satellite image processing, Earth surface
sewerage networks, Structural safety and mitigating plans against
features inventory, Geomorphology, Landuse classification, Landuse
natural and human caused threats.
planning and landcover mapping, Flood plain mapping and flood plain
zoning, Remote sensing applications in water resources, agriculture,
CVL835 Eco-hydraulics and Hydrology
geology and environmental monitoring, Applications in snow and
3 Credits (3-0-0) glacier studies, Snow line, Ice cover, Snow-pack properties, Integrated
Classification of Hydro environmental systems, governing equations use of remote sensing and GIS, Database preparation and Decision
for open surface flow domains, pollutant transport equations in hydro- support analysis, Estimation of damages due to hydrologic extremes
environmental flow systems, computational methods and solution and preparation of contingency plans, Case studies.
techniques. Study of ecological descriptors, numerical ecology, multi-
objective definitions of environmental flows, Hydrologic indices for CVL840 planning and Design of Sustainable Transport
e-flows and river health assessment. Riverine habitat characterization Systems
and habitat simulation models. Anthropogenic triggers for changes
3 Credits (3-0-0)
in riverine habitat.
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL741; B.Tech: Instructor's
CVL836 Advanced Hydrologic Land Surface processes permission
3 Credits (3-0-0) Sustainable Transportation Planning and Design including:
Consideration of bicycles, pedestrian, mass transit modes, and
Introduction: Eco-hydro-climatology; Climate System; Climate, weather
private vehicles like cars and two wheelers as well as how these
and Climate Change; Water, Energy and Carbon Cycle; Overview of
modes interrelate. Applicability at varying scales, from a downtown
Earth’s Atmosphere: Heat-Balance of Earth Atmosphere System;
street to a neighborhood to a regional network Case studies are
Temporal Variation of Air temperature; Introduction to Atmospheric
discussed from different parts of the world. Various indicators for
Thermodynamics: First and second law of thermodynamics, Adiabatic
measuring sustainability index of transport system including public
process and adiabatic lapse rate, Entropy, Clausius-Clapeyron Theory,
health, resource consumption, local and global pollution and equity
Introduction to cloud microphysics and cloud droplet formation
considerations are discussed.
process, Cloud liquid water content, entrainment, warm and cold
cloud. Hydrologic Cycle: Global water balance; Precipitation and
CVL841 Advanced Transportation Modelling
Weather, Forms of Precipitation; Atmospheric Stability; Monsoon;
Global Wind Circulation; Indian Summer Monsoon Rainfall. Climate 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Variability: Floods, Droughts, Climate Extremes. Climate Change: Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL741; B.Tech: Instructor's
Introduction; Causes and Modeling of Climate Change, Climate permission
Models, Downscaling; IPCC Scenarios; Commonly used Statistical
Systems Approach to Travel demand models, Trip generation Models
Methods in Hydro-climatology: Trend Analysis; EOF, PCA; Canonical
Using Different Statistical techniques, Trip distribution,Discrete Choice
Correlation; Statistical Downscaling; Ecological Climatology:
Logit, Nested Logit and other Models,Network Assignment,Traffic
Leaf energy fluxes and leaf photosynthesis; Ecosystem and
Assignment Using User Equilibrium and Systems Optimization
vegetation dynamics; Coupled climate vegetation dynamics, Carbon
Techniques, Revealed preference and Stated Preference surveys,
cycle climate feedbacks.
Analysis of Ranked and Rated data, Demand models for Nonmotorised
transport and Public Transport systems.
CVL837 Mechanics of Sediment Transport
3 Credits (2-0-2) CVL842 Geometric Design of Roads
Introduction; Equations of Particle Motion particle in a moving fluid, 3 Credits (2-0-2)
collision with the bed, diffusion of turbulence; Macroscopic View of
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL741, CVL742; B.Tech: CVL261
Sediment Transport – bedload, suspended load; Threshold Condition
for Sediment Motion – Critical stress for flow over a granular bed, and one TE elective
Shields diagram; Mechanics of Bedload Transport: Bagnold hypothesis Introduction to basic road geoemetric design elements and
of bedload transport, bedload transport relations; Mechanics of methodology - design philosophy and design techniques; Design
Suspended Sediment Transport; Total load transport; Descriptive controls - human, vehicle and speed related factors. Road vehicle
Analysis of Bedforms – introduction of bedform mechanics, dunes, performance - road vehicle dynamics - tractive and resisting forces.
antidunes, ripples, bars; Stability Analysis of Bedforms; Mechanism Braking forces. Theoretical and practical stopping distances. Elements
of transportation of materials by fluid flow through pipeline; Rheology of geometric design - cross section elements; Horizontal Alignment
and classification of complex mixtures; Fundamentals of two-phase - tangents, curves, transitions, superelevation; Vertical Alignment -
flow; Phase separation and settling behaviour; Flow of non-Newtonian grades and curves; Coordination of Horizontal and Vertical Alignment.
fluids through pipes: Turbulent flows of Complex mixtures, Slurry Design of Intersections at-grade- design principles, channelization,
pipeline transportation, Design methods. roundabouts, Interchanges- types, warrants, lane balancing; Road
155

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
side safety- hazards and clear zone concept, traffic safety barriers, CVL849 Traffic Flow Modelling
impact attenuation. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL844 Transportation Infrastructure Management Pre-requisite(s): CVL742
3 Credits (3-0-0) Descriptors of traffic flow: Macroscopic and Microscopic, time, space
and generalized measurement regions. Cumulative plots. Traffic Flow
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL740; B.Tech: Instructor's models - General classification and typology. Macroscopic Flow Models
permission - continuity equation, LWR model, higher order models, numerical
Transportation infrastructure components; Deterioration phenomena; schema, Mesoscopic Flow Models - gas kinetic theory, Microscopic
Effect of external factors like environment, traffic loading,material and Submicroscopic Flow Models - car following and lane changing;
properties on deterioration mechanisms; Evaluation techniques Pipes and forbes models; General motors-Gazis-Herman-Rothery
to evaluate damage: destructive, nondestructive; Performance (GHR) models, Stability analysis, macro-micro bridge. Modelling at
models: development, calibration; Infrastructure management Junctions/Intersections; Un-signalized and Signalized; Roundabouts;
systems; Serviceability of condition and safety; Decision making and Pedestrian Modelling - normal and panic movements; variations across
optimization techniques applied to infrastructure management; Life infrastructure; Simulation - simple and complex traffic conditions.
cycle cost analysis techniques.
CVL850 Transportation Logistics
CVL845 Viscoelastic Behavior of Bituminous Materials 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL742 else Instructor's permission
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL740; B.Tech: Instructor's (including B.Tech)
permission Evolution of freight and logistics; Interrelationships between
Overview of material behavior-elastic, plastic, viscoelastic, Viscoplastic society, environment and freight transport; Survey methodologies
response; Aging; Issues in representative volume element; Mechanical to understand freight movement; Cost measurement: Production,
analogs for viscoelastic response; Fundamental viscoelastic response- Holding, Transportation, Handling; Effect of internal and external
creep compliance, relaxation, complex modulus; Interconversion variables on cost; Demand forecasting; Inventory planning and
techniques to obtain fundamental viscoelastic responses; Time- management; Transportation and distribution network: Design,
temperature superposition; linear viscoelastic constitutive Reverse Logistics. Development, Management; Ware house
equations; Elastic-viscoelastic correspondence principle; Predicting operations; Pricing: Perishable, seasonal demand, uncertainty
material behavior-undamaged, damaged state conditions, issues; Vehicle routing: One-to-one distribution, One-to-many
Introduction to nonlinear viscoelasticity, Viscoelastoplastic behavoir, distribution, Shortest path algorithm, Quickest time algorithm;
fracture mechanics. Logistics information system; Designing and planning transportation
networks; City logistics.
CVL846 Transportation System Management
CVL851 Special Topics in Transportation Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL741 and CVL742; B.Tech:
Pre-requisite(s): CVL740 or CVL741 or CVL742 or Instructor's
Instructor's permission
permission
Transportation systems - resource management, approaches to
funding. Asset and demand management - Integrated network Course details shall be announced by the instructor at the time
design, changing travel behaviour, optimising asset management, role of offering of the course. The lectures will be supplemented by
of technology; Optimizing the investment outcomes - movement of reading materials. The assessment will be based on a combination
freight and passenger, traffic. Land use planning and urban growth of assignments, quizzes, and term papers and tests.
management - land use and its effect on infrastructure and efficient
network operations. Congestion, systemic congestion improvement CVS852 Advanced Topics in Transportation Engineering
and system-wide efficiency, Transit oriented development, safety 3 Credits (0-0-6)
considerations; evaluation of strategies; case studies.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL740, CVL741, CVL742
CVL847 Transportation Economics This is an advanced course for M.Tech. Transportation engineering
program where students will study a specialized topic within
3 Credits (3-0-0)
transportation engineering (including but not limited to transportation
Pre-requisite(s): M.Tech: CVL741; B.Tech: Instructor's planning, traffic engineering and pavement engineering). The topic
permission shall be announced by instructor at the beginning. The performance
of student in this course will be evaluated through presentation(s)
Overview of Transportation Economics; Transportation Investments
and report(s) made by student during the registered term.
and economic Development. Basics of Engineering economics,
marginal analysis, opportunity cost, shadow price, money value
of time, discounted cash flow, NPV, ROR, benefit-cost analysis. CVD853 Major project part-I
Road User Costs; Public transportation economics; Social Cost 9 Credits (0-0-18)
of Transportation;Cost of congestion, pollution, traffic accidents.
Pre-requisite(s): CVL740, CVL741, CVL742
Taxation, regulations, financing Transport Systems; Legal framework
for transportation sector, case studies.
CVD854 Major project part-II
CVL848 Discrete Choice Methods for Travel Demand 12 Credits (0-0-24)
Analysis Pre-requisite(s): CVL740, CVL741, CVL742
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL741 & CVL748 or Instructors' permission CVL856 Strengthening and Retrofitting of Structures
The course will provide the students with the fundamentals of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
discrete choice modelling, specification and estimation techniques, Structural assessment, damage under accidental and cyclic loads,
and design of choice experiments and data collection. There will be cracking in structures, evaluation of damage, analysis of existing
applications of these techniques in transportation problems such as structures, compression, flexural and shear strengthening,
electric mobility, connected and automated vehicles and advanced strengthening using laminates, strengthening using prestressing,
mass transportation systems. bracing and stiffening of structures, maintenance of retrofitting,
156

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Civil Engineering
design codes for retrofitting of structures, retrofitting of steel structure interaction. Design of offshore platforms: introduction, fixed
structures, retrofitting of masonry structures. and floating platforms. Buoyed structures/ articulated towers; tension-
leg platform (TLP); Marine risers; compliant and non-compliant
CVL857 Structural Safety and Reliability structures; offshore pipelines and risers; Steel, concrete, and hybrid
3 Credits (3-0-0) platforms. Buoys and mooring system design; Design criteria and
code provisions. Environmental loading. Wind, wave and current
Fundamentals of Set Theory and Probability; Probability Distribution,
loads. Loads and stability during handling and towing. Introduction
Regression Analysis, Hypothesis Testing. Stochastic Process and Its
to stochastic dynamics of ocean structures considering different sea
Moments; Probability Distributions; Concepts of Safety Factors, Safety,
spectra. Soil-structure interaction (SSI): beam on Winkler foundation
Reliability and Risk Analysis; First Order and Second Order Reliability
(p-y curve approach). Dynamic analysis of SPAR platforms. Fatigue
Methods; Simulation Based Methods; Confidence Limits and Baysean
analysis of fixed and floating offshore structure: stress concentration,
Revision of Reliability; Reliability Based Design; System Reliability;
S-N curves. Foundations: site investigations, gravity, jacket platforms,
Examples of Reliability Analysis of Structures.
hybrid platforms. Piled foundation and behavior under dynamic
loading. Static and dynamic analysis of platforms and components.
CVL858 Theory of plates and Shells
Dynamic analysis using software: response of fixed type offshore
3 Credits (3-0-0)
structures, articulated towers, single leg and multi-legged towers.
Thin and thick plate theories. Bending of long rectangular plate to a
cylindrical surface. Prismatic folded plate systems. Pure and symmetric CVL863 General Continuum Mechanics
bending of plates. Small and large deflections of plates. Special and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
approximate methods in theory of plates. General theory of cylindrical
Introduction: Field and particle theories in physics. Historical
shells. Shell equations. Approximate solutions of plates and shells
development of continuum mechanics-A basic engineering science.
equations. Analysis and design of cylindrical shells. Approximate
Classical theories: Stress and kinematics. Elasticity, Viscoelasticity
design methods for doubly curved shells. Stress analysis methods
and Elastoplasticity; Newtonian fluids.
in sperical shells. Spherical shell of constant thickness. Symmetrical
bending of shallow sperical shells. Conical shells. Continuum thermomechanics; Classius-Duhem Inequality;
Thermodynamics with internal variables. Constitutive equations;
CVL859 Theory of Structural Stability Axioms for simple materials; Frame indifference; Finite elasticity;
Hyper/hypoelasticity; Non- Newtonian fluids.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Polar and nonlocal materials; Materials of differential/gradient
Introduction: Buckling of steel and concrete structures; Conservative
type; Configurational mechanics; Biomechanics; Nanomechanics.
and non-conservative loads. Elastic buckling of columns and beam-
Theories of conduction and diffusion; Electromagnetism. Coupled
columns: Static, dynamical and energy-based approaches. Viscoelastic
fields: Thermoelasticity and electromagnetoelasticity; MHD;
and elastoplastic buckling. Torsional buckling. Flexural-torsional and
Chemomechanics. Intermediate problems; Statistical continuum
lateral buckling. Plate and frame buckling. Imperfection sensitivity;
theories; Relativistic continuum mechanics; Materials models for
Post-buckling theory. Snap-through. Dynamic stability: Divergence,
luminiferous Aether.
flutter and parametric resonance. Nonlinear dynamical systems
Rational methodology and realism; Current trends.
theory; Bifurcations. Recent trends.
CVL864 Structural Health Monitoring
CVL860 Advanced Finite Element Method and
programming 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Concept of structural health monitoring, sensor systems and hardware
3 Credits (2-0-2)
requirements, global and local techniques, computational aspects
Pre-requisite(s): CVL757 of global dynamic techniques, experimental mode shapes, damage
Finite element method (FEM) to solve complex structural engineering localization and quantification, piezo–electric materials and other
problems. Various types of finite elements (FE) considering nonlinear smart materials, electro–mechanical impedance (EMI) technique,
material models; constitutive laws; hybrid elements. Strong and adaptations of EMI technique.
weak form representation and solutions. FEM for dynamic problems: Laboratory: Sensor installation and diagnostics, mode shape
consistent mass matrix, vibration of bars, beams, and plate elements. extraction, location and quantification of damage using global dynamic
FEM for buckling problems: geometric matrix, buckling of struts, and techniques, damage detection using electro – mechanical impedance
plate elements. FE modeling and analysis of complex structures: technique, remote monitoring.
3-D frames, shear walls, bridges, cooling towers, continuua etc.
Computational aspects: meshing, convergence, singularity, etc. CVL865 Structural Vibration Control
Interpretation of results. Comparison with other methods.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CVL861 Analysis and Design of Machine Foundations Pre-requisite(s): CVL759
3 Credits (2-0-2) Introduction; Types and classifications; Control theories; Optimal
stiffness distributions for building type structures; Role of damping
General design requirements, general dynamics of machine
in controlling motion; Active and semi-active systems; Tuned mass
foundations for rotating and reciprocating machines, determination
dampers - single/ multiple; Quasi-static active control; Passive control:
of soil properties, modelling, analysis and design of block/frame type
viscous, visco-elastic, friction, hysteretic dampers, base isolation;
foundations, specific details for machines applying impulsive loads,
Nonlinear modeling; Dynamic feedback control; Neural network
compressors and turbo-generators, detailed dynamic analysis and
based control systems; Design for buildings, bridges, power plants,
modes of vibration for frame type foundations, techniques for vibration
and other structures; Current trends and performance-based design.
isolation, practical case studies, codal requirements, construction
aspects of machine foundations.
CVL866 Wind Resistant Design of Structures
Laboratory : Instrumentation aspects in terms of sensors and data
3 Credits (3-0-0)
acquisition systems, measurement of dynamic soil parameters,
measurement of vibration related parameters, vibration isolation, Pre-requisite(s): CVL759
computational aspects related to frame type foundations including Causes and types of wind. Atmospheric boundary layer and
dynamic analysis. turbulence. Wind velocity measurements and distribution. Bluffbody
aerodynamics, random vibrations, and spectral analysis. Along
CVL862 Design of Offshore Structures
wind and across wind response considering vortex shedding of
3 Credits (3-0-0) tall buildings, towers, and slender structures. Vortex induced
Rudiments of offshore engineering; sea spectra; wave theories; wave- vibrations of slender structures. Wind-Induced lock-in excitation of
157

Civil Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
tall structures. Buffeting response prediction subjected to random structural materials at elevated temperatures; fire response of steel,
load. Aeroelastic phenomena. Turbulence modeling. Gust buffeting concrete, fiber reinforced polymers, high-performance materials etc.;
and fluttering effect on structures. Vibration of cable supported computational procedures to predict structural behavior under fire
bridges and power lines due to wind effects. Wind pressure on conditions; structural fire resistance based on theoretical/ empirical
cooling towers. Design of cladding and wind damping devices. Wind relationships; performance-based fire engineering; strengthening/
tunnel simulations and tornado effects. repair of structures.
CVL869 probabilistic Structural Dynamics CVL874 Quality and Safety in Construction
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): CVL759/AML733/APL734 Introduction to safety. Types of injuries, Factors affecting safety,
Strategic Planning for safety provisions. Personal & Structural safety
Concepts of set theory and probability, random variables and function
- Safety consideration during construction, demolition and during
of random variables, theory of random process, stationary and
use of equipment. Recording injuries and accident indices. Method
non-stationary process, expected values, moments, spectral properties
statement, SOPs, PPE, Inspections, Investigations. Site safety
of random process, response of linear systems to random excitations,
programmes - JSA, JHA, Root cause analysis, meetings, safety policy,
time and frequency domain analysis, SDOF and MDOF systems,
manuals, training & orientation. Safety legislation regard to violation.
structural failure under random vibrations, crossing rates, distribution
of local/extreme peaks, first passage probability, application to Introduction to quality, assurance, control and audit. Regulatory
earthquake and wind engineering, introduction to nonlinear systems, agent - owner, designer, contractor. Strategic Planning and control of
Effect of Parameter Uncertainty, Monte-Carlo simulation. quality during design and construction, Quality tools in construction
projects, Customer satisfaction and QFD, Quantitative techniques in
CVL871 Durability and Repair of Concrete Structures quality control, Quality assurance during construction, Inspection of
materials and machinery. Assessing quality. Teachings/findings of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Gurus - Concept and philosophy of TQM, 6 Sigma, ISO Certification.
Chemical composition of concrete, permeability and transport IS codes and standards regard to quality & safety.
processes, corrosion of reinforcement and prestressing steel in
concrete, carbonation, chloride attack, alkali-silica reaction, freeze- CVL875 Sustainable Materials and Green Buildings
thaw attack, sulphate attack, acid attack, effect of fire and high
3 Credits (3-0-0)
temperatures and seawater attack, cracking, weathering, biological
processes, non-destructive testing, repairs, protection and retrofitting, Introduction and definition of Sustainability. Carbon cycle and role of
durability based design of structures. construction material such as concrete and steel, etc. CO 2 contribution
from cement and other construction materials. Construction
CVL872 Infrastructure Development and Management materials and indoor air quality. No/Low cement concrete. Recycled
and manufactured aggregate. Role of QC and durability. Life cycle
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and sustainability. Components of embodied energy, calculation of
Introduction to Indian Infrastructure. Govt. initiatives through various embodied energy for construction materials. Exergy concept and
five year plans. primary energy. Embodied energy via-a-vis operational energy in
Overview of various sectors of infrastructure and SEZ. conditioned building. Life Cycle energy use. Control of energy use in
Infrastructure procurement through Public-Private-Partnership. building, ECBC code, codes in neighboring tropical countries, OTTV
Sector-wise differences in policies, Concession agreement, concepts and calculations, features of LEED and TERI Griha ratings.
Selection procedure of concessionaires, Issues in financial closure, Role of insulation and thermal properties of construction materials,
Stakeholder management. influence of moisture content and modeling. Performance ratings of
green buildings. Zero energy building.
Financial Models, Risk management, Environmental Impact
Assessment, Case studies.
CVL876 Digital Design and Construction
3 Credits (2-0-2)
CVL873 Fire Engineering and Design
Fundamentals of BIM – terminology, CAD & BIM. IFCs, schemas,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
interoperability, parametric modeling. BIM-based design process and
(A) Fire engineering: fundamentals of fire science, fire dynamics,
analysis - design coordination. BIM-based construction process – 4D,
hazard mitigation, and safety; codes, standards, rules and fire safety
5D, nD BIM. BIM-based operation issues – facility management.
regulations; thermodynamics, thermofluids, heat and mass transfer;
Drivers and barriers in BIM adoption, BIM global practices.
human behavior in fire and urban planning; fire testing methods
Automation in design and construction, virtual experiments –
for materials; large-scale fire testing. “Fire protection” - current
augmented reality, virtual reality, use of sensors in construction.
methods in fire safety engineering; mechanics of repair; mitigation
Robots in construction, autonomous robots, 3D printing technology
of fire damage by due design, and construction; industrial fire safety.
in construction.
Passive fire protection: analyzing the thermal effects of fires on
buildings and designing structural members. Introduction to active Drones for Construction monitoring, Internet of Things, Smart
fire protection. Manufacturing, etc.
(B) Structural fire engineering: fire behavior and scenarios, heat
CVD895 MS Research project
transfer to the structure, structural response and stability under
thermo-mechanical loads; fire safety design; mechanical properties of 36 Credits (0-0-72)
158

Department of Computer Science and Engineering
COL100 Introduction to Computer Science COL226 programming Languages
4 Credits (3-0-2) 5 Credits (3-0-4)
Organization of Computing Systems. Concept of an algorithm; Pre-requisite(s): COL106
termination and correctness. Algorithms to programs: specification,
Overlaps with: COL765
top-down development and stepwise refinement. Problem solving
using a functional style; Correctness issues in programming; Efficiency Value and state oriented paradigms. Translation. Notions of syntax and
issues in programming; Time and space measures. Procedures, semantics of programming languages; introduction to operational/
functions. Data types, representational invariants. Encapsulation, natural semantics of functional and imperative languages. Data
abstractions, interaction and modularity. Identifying and exploiting abstractions and control constructs; block-structure and scope,
inherent concurrency. Structured style of imperative programming. principles of abstraction, qualification and correspondence; parameter
Introduction to numerical methods. At least one example of large passing mechanisms; runtime structure and operating environment;
program development. practical and implementation issues in run-time systems and
environment; abstract machines; features of functional and imperative
COL106 Data Structures & Algorithms languages; the un-typed and simply-typed Lambda calculus, type
systems for programming languages including simple types and
5 Credits (3-0-4)
polymorphism; objects; classes and inheritance in object-oriented
Pre-requisite(s): COL100 languages. Interactive programming and interfaces. The laboratory
Introduction to object-oriented programming through stacks queues activities will involve building a variety of small interpreters for core
and linked lists. Dictionaries; skip-lists, hashing, analysis of collision languages in various paradigms. Tools such as lex and yacc will be
resolution techniques. Trees, traversals, binary search trees, optimal introduced for front-end analysis.
and average BSTs. Balanced BST: AVL Trees, 2-4 trees, red-black
trees, B-trees. Tries and suffix trees. Priority queues and binary COp290 Design practices
heaps. Sorting: merge, quick, radix, selection and heap sort, Graphs: 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Breadth first search and connected components. Depth first search
Pre-requisite(s): COL 106
in directed and undirected graphs.
The contents may differ each year depending on the instructor.
Disjkra’s algorithm, directed acyclic graphs and topological sort. Some
The course should involve 2-3 large programming projects done in
geometric data-structures.
groups of 2-4.
COL202 Discrete Mathematical Structures
COD300 Design project
4 Credits (3-1-0)
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Overlaps with: MTL180
Basic design methodology – introduction to the steps involved,
Propositional logic, Predicate Calculus and Quantifiers; Proof Methods; Familiarization with software practices, tools and techniques, software
Sets, functions, relations, Cardinality, Infinity and Diagonalization; project involving conceptualization, design analysis, implementation
Induction and Recursion; Modular Arithmetic, Euclid’s Algorithm, and testing using the tools and techniques learnt.
primes, Public Key Cryptography; Polynomials, finite fields and Secret
Sharing; Coding Theory: Error correcting codes, Hamming codes, COD310 Mini project
Hamming bound; Basic Counting - Pigeon hole principle; Advanced
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Counting - recurrence relations, generating functions, inclusion-
Design/fabrication/implementation work under the guidance of a
exclusion; basic information theory, entropy, Kraft’s inequality,
faculty member. Prior to registration, a detailed plan of work should be
mutual information, lower bounds; Probability - sample space,
submitted by the student to the Head of the Department for approval.
conditional probability, expectation, linearity of expectation, variance,
Markov, Chebychev, probabilistic methods; Graph Theory - Eulerian,
COR310 professional practices (CS)
Hamiltonian & planar graphs, edge and vertex coloring.
2 Credits (1-0-2)
COL215 Digital Logic & System Design EC - 60
5 Credits (3-0-4) The course would consist of talks by working professionals from
industry, government and research organizations. It may also include
Pre-requisite(s): COL100, ELL101
site visits to various organizations.
Overlaps with: ELL201
The course contents can be broadly divided into two parts. First part COS310 Independent Study (CS)
deals with the basics of circuit design and includes topics like circuit
3 Credits (0-3-0)
minimization, sequential circuit design and design of and using RTL
building blocks. The second part is focused on ASIC style system EC - 60
design and introduces VHDL, FPGA as implementation technology, Research oriented activities or study of subjects outside regular
synthesis steps as well as testing techniques. Course ends with course offerings under the guidance of a faculty member. Prior to
introducing the challenges of embedded design where software is registration, a detailed plan of work should be submitted by the
becoming integral to all devices. The laboratory assignments are a student to the Head of the Department for approval.
key component of this course and requires students to design and
implement circuits and sub-systems on FPGA kits covering almost all COp315 Embedded System Design project
the topics covered in the lectures.
4 Credits (0-1-6)
COL216 Computer Architecture Pre-requisite(s): COL215, COL216 or equivalent courses
4 Credits (3-0-2) Students working in small groups of four to six are expected to
deliver in one semester on an innovative solution for problems/
Pre-requisite(s): ELL201 challenges that are typical to India and perhaps other developing
Overlaps with: ELL305 countries. The students would have to go through the full cycle of
specification, design and prototyping/building a concept demonstrator.
History of computers, Boolean logic and number systems, Assembly
Key component of the assessment would be through a public
language programming, ARM assembly language, Computer
demonstration of their solution.
arithmetic, Design of a basic processor, Microprogramming, Pipelining,
Memory system, Virtual memory, I/O protocols and devices, Learning to work in groups as well as planning and delivering a large
Multiprocessors. task are other expected learnings.
159

Computer Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
COL331 Operating Systems matching, KMP and Rabin-Karp. Universal hashing and applications.
5 Credits (3-0-4) Geometric algorithms like convex hulls, multidimensional data
structures, plane sweep paradigm.
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 COP290
COL352 Introduction to Automata & Theory of
Overlaps with: ELL405
Computation
Primary UNIX abstractions: threads, address spaces, file system,
devices, inter process communication; Introduction to hardware 3 Credits (3-0-0)
support for OS (e.g., discuss x86 architecture); Processes and Pre-requisite(s): COL202
Memory; Address Translation; Interrupts and Exceptions; Context
Regular Languages, Finite Automata, equivalence, minimization,
Switching; Scheduling; Multiprocessors and Locking; Condition
Myhill-Nerode Theorem, introduction to non-determinism, Context
Variables, Semaphores, Barriers, Message Passing, etc.; File system
free grammars, Pushdown automata, equivalence and applications.
semantics, design and implementation; File system Durability and
Turing machines, Recursive and Recursively enumerable sets, non-
Crash recovery; Security and Access Control.
determinism, RAMs and equivalence, Universal Turing Machines,
undecidability, Rice’s theorems for RE sets, Post machines, Basics of
COL333 Principles of Artificial Intelligence
Recursive function theory. Equivalence, Church’s thesis, computational
4 Credits (3-0-2)
complexity, space and time complexity of Turing Machines,
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 Relationships, Savage’s theorem, Complexity classes, Complete
problems, NP-completeness, Cook-Levin theorem.
Overlaps with: COL671, COL770, ELL789
Philosophy of artificial intelligence, problem solving, search techniques, COL362 Introduction to Database Management Systems
constraint satisfaction, game playing (minimax, expectiminimax), 4 Credits (3-0-2)
automated planning, knowledge representation and reasoning
through logic, knowledge representation and reasoning through fuzzy Pre-requisite(s): COL106
logic and Bayesian networks, Markov decision processes, machine Data models (ER, relational models, constraints, normalization),
learning, neural networks, reinforcement learning, soft computing, declarative querying (relational algebra, datalog, SQL), query
introduction to natural language processing. processing/optimization (basics of indexes, logical/physical
query plans, views) and transaction management (introduction
COL334 Computer Networks to concurrency control and recovery). Overview of XML data
4 Credits (3-0-2) management, text management, distributed data management.
Course project to build a web-based database application.
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, COL216
Overlaps with: ELL402 COL380 Introduction to parallel & Distributed
Students will be exposed to common network algorithms and programming
protocols, including physical layer modulation (analog AM/FM, 3 Credits (2-0-2)
digital ASK/FSK/PSK), encoding (NRZ, Manchester, 4B/5B), link layer
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, COL351, COL331
framing, error control, medium access control (TDMA, FDMA, CSMA/
CA, CSMA/CD), bridging, SDN, addressing (IPv4/v6), name resolution Overlaps with: COL730
(DNS), routing (DV, LS, protocols RIP, OSPF, BGP), transport protocols Concurrency, Consistency of state and memory, Parallel architecture,
(TCP), congestion avoidance (window based AIMD), and application Latency and throughput, Models of parallel computation, performance
design models (client-server, P2P, functioning of HTTP, SMTP, metrics and speedup, Message-passing and Shared-memory
IMAP). Programming assignments will be designed to test network programming paradigms, Communication networks and primitives,
application design concepts, protocol design towards developing error Concepts of Atomicity, Consensus, Conditions and Synchronization,
detection and correction methods, efficient network utilization, and Security, Fault tolerance, Replication of state and memory.
familiarization with basic tools such as ping, trace route, wires hark.
COD492 B.Tech. project part-I
COL341 Fundamentals of Machine Learning
6 Credits (0-0-12)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, MTL106
Overlaps with: COD490
Overlaps with: ELL409, ELL784 This course is part-1 of a large project and is designed for CSE B.Tech.
Supervised Learning Algorithms: 1. Logistic Regression 2.Neural students seeking department specialization. This project is done
Networks 3.Decision Trees 4.Nearest Neighbour 5. Support individually, or sometimes in small groups, under the supervision of
Vector Machines 6. Naive Bayes. ML and MAP estimates. Bayes’ one or more faculty member of the computer science department.
Optimal Classifier. Introduction to Graphical Models. Generative Vs. This project spans also the course COD494. Hence it is expected
Discriminative Models. Unsupervised learning algorithms: K-Means that the problem specification and the milestones to be achieved
clustering, Expectation Maximization, Gaussian Mixture Models. PCA in solving the problem are clearly specified. Students not seeking
and Feature Selection, PAC Learnability, Reinforcement Learning. specialization may takes this course of if they are interested in the
Some application areas of machine learning e.g. Natural Language COD490-COD492 sequence.
Processing, Computer Vision, applications on the web. Introduction
to advanced topics such as Statistical Relational Learning. COD494 B.Tech. project part-II
8 Credits (0-0-16)
COL351 Analysis and Design of Algorithms
Pre-requisite(s): COD492, EC 100
4 Credits (3-1-0)
The student(s) who work on a project are expected to work towards
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 the goals and milestones set in COD492. At the end there would
Overlaps with: MTL342, COL702 be a demonstration of the solution and possible future work on the
same problem. A dissertation outlining the entire problem, including
Checking 2-edge, 2-node and strong connectivity using DFS, Strongly
a survey of literature and the various results obtained along with
connected components. Greedy algorithms, minimum spanning
their solutions is expected to be produced.
trees (Prim/Kruskal), Union-find data structure. Matroids. Divide and
conquer algorithms. Polynomial multiplication, DFT and FFT. Dynamic COL632: Introduction to Database Systems
Programming, All pairs shortest paths (Bellman-Ford, Floyd Warshall).
4 Credits (3-0-2)
s-t flows, Ford-Fulkerson, Edmonds-Karp, applications of maxflow
Intractability, NP-completeness, Polynomial time reductions. String Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
160

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Computer Science and Engineering
Overlap with: COL362 COL702 Advanced Data Structures and Algorithms
Data models (ER, relational models, constraints, normalization), 4 Credits (3-0-2)
declarative querying (relational algebra, datalog, SQL), query
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
processing/optimization (basics of indexes, logical/physical
query plans, views) and transaction management (introduction Overlaps with: COL351
to concurrency control and recovery). Overview of XML data Review of basic data structures and their realization in object oriented
management, text management, distributed data management. Environments. Dynamic Data structures: 2-3 trees, Redblack trees,
Course project to build a web-based database application. binary heaps, binomial and Fibonacci heaps, Skip lists, Universal
Hashing. Data structures for maintaining ranges, intervals and disjoint
COL633: Resource Management in Computer Systems sets with applications. B-trees. Tries and suffix trees. Priority queues
4 Credits (3-0-2) and binary heaps. Sorting: merge, quick, radix, selection and heap
sort, Graphs: Breadth first search and connected components. Depth
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
first search in directed and undirected graphs. Disjkra’s algorithm,
Overlap with: COL331, EEL405 Directed acyclic graphs and topological sort. Some geometric data-
Primary UNIX abstractions: threads, address spaces, filesystem, structures. Basic algorithmic techniques like dynamic programming and
devices, interprocess communication; Introduction to hardware divide-and-conquer. Sorting algorithms with analysis, integer sorting.
support for OS (e.g., discuss x86 architecture); Processes and Graph algorithms like DFS with applications, MSTs and shortest paths.
Memory; Address Translation; Interrupts and Exceptions; Context
COL703 Logic for Computer Science
Switching; Scheduling; Multiprocessors and Locking; Condition
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Variables, Semaphores, Barriers, Message Passing, etc.; Filesystem
semantics, design and implementation; Filesystem Durability and Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
Crash recovery; Security and Access Control
Overlaps with: COL765 & COL226
Review of the principle of mathematical induction; the principle
COL671: Principles of Artificial Intelligence:
of structural induction; review of Boolean algebras; Syntax of
4 Credits (3-0-2)
propositional formulas; Truth and the semantics of propositional logic;
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent Notions of satisfiability, validity, inconsistency; Deduction systems for
propositional logic; Completeness of deduction systems; First order
Overlap with: COL333, COL770, ELL789
logic (FOL); Proof theory for FOL; introduction to model theory;
Problem solving, search techniques, control strategies, game playing completeness and compactness theorems; First order theories.
(minimax), reasoning, knowledge representation through predicate Programming exercises will include representation and evaluation;
logic, rule based systems, semantics nets, frames, conceptual conversion to normal-forms; tautology checking; proof normalization;
dependency. Planning. Handling uncertainty: probability theory, resolution; unification; Skolemization, conversion to Horn-clauses;
Bayesian Networks, Dempster-Shafer theory, Fuzzy logic, Learning binary-decision diagrams. Decidability, undecidability and complexity
through Neural nets - Back propagation, radial basis functions, Neural results. Introduction to formal methods, temporal/modal logics.
computational models - Hopfield Nets, Boltzman machines. PROLOG
programming. Expert Systems, Soft computing, introduction to natural COL707 Introduction to Ethical Issues in Computer
language processing. Science
4 credits (3-0-2)
COL672: Computer Networks
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 or COL702
4 Credits (3-0-2)
systems – consequentialism, deontological, virtue ethics; Known
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent concerns that arise at different layers in an information system –
Overlap with: COL334, ELL402 user interface design, data and privacy, algorithms and artificial
intelligence, multi-stakeholder system design, and management
Students will be exposed to common network algorithms and
policies; Methods to address these concerns; Assignments to analyze
protocols, including physical layer modulation (analog AM/FM,
various layers in information systems through the lenses of different
digital ASK/FSK/PSK), encoding (NRZ, Manchester, 4B/5B), link layer
ethical theories; Design methods such as participatory design and
framing, error control, medium access control (TDMA, FDMA, CSMA/
action research; Application of design methods to formulate new
CA, CSMA/CD), bridging, SDN, addressing (IPv4/v6), name resolution
information systems or improve existing ones; Political economy of
(DNS), routing (DV, LS, protocols RIP, OSPF, BGP), transport protocols
technology; Theories of technology determinism and Social control
(TCP), congestion avoidance (window based AIMD), and application
of technology.
design models (clientserver,P2P, functioning of HTTP, SMTP,
IMAP). Programming assignments will be designed to test network COL718 Architecture of High performance Computers
application design concepts, protocol design towards developing error
4 Credits (3-0-2)
detection and correction methods, efficient network utilization, and
familiarization with basic tools such as ping, traceroute, wireshark. Pre-requisite(s): COL216 OR Equivalent
Classification of parallel computing structures; Instruction level
COp701 Software Systems Laboratory parallelism - static and dynamic pipelining, improving branch
3 Credits (0-0-6) performance, superscalar and VLIW processors; High performance
memory system; Shared memory multiprocessors and cache
The contents may differ each year depending on the instructor.
coherence; Multiprocessor interconnection networks; Performance
The course should involve 2-3 large programming projects done in
modelling; Issues in programming multiprocessors; Data parallel
groups of 2-4. A set of three project oriented assignments which will
architectures.
be announced at the start of each semester with definite submission
deadlines. The set of assignments will be designed to develop skills COL719 Synthesis of Digital Systems
and familarity with a majority of the following: make, configuration
4 Credits (3-0-2)
management tools, installation of software, archiving and creation
of libraries, version control systems, documentation and literate Pre-requisite(s): COL215 OR Equivalent
programming systems, GUI creation, distributed state maintenance After a basic overview of the VLSI design flow, hardware modelling
over a network, programming in different environments like desktop principles and hardware description using the VHDL language are
and handhelds, program parsing and compilation including usage of covered. This is followed by a study of the major steps involved in
standard libraries like pthreads, numerical packages, XML and semi- behavioural synthesis: scheduling, allocation, and binding. This is
structured data, simulation environments, testing and validation tools. followed by register-transfer level synthesis, which includes retiming
161

Computer Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
and Finite State Machine encoding. Logic synthesis, consisting Data flow. Abstract interpretation. Correctness issues in code
of combinational logic optimisation and technology mapping, is optimizations. Algorithms and implementation techniques for type-
covered next. Popular chip architectures - standard cells and FPGA checking, code generation and optimization. Students will design and
are introduced. The course concludes with a brief overview of layout implement translators, static analysis, type-checking and optimization.
synthesis topics: placement and routing. This is a praxis-based course. Students will use a variety of software
tools and techniques in implementing a complete compiler.
COL720 Real Time Systems
4 Credits (3-0-2) COL729 Compiler Optimization
Pre-requisite(s): COL331, COL216 4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
Types of real time systems; hard and soft real time systems; Pre-requisite(s): COL 216, COL 226 OR Equivalent
reference models; priority driven approaches for real time Program representation – symbol table, abstract syntax tree;
scheduling; clock based scheduling, schedulability tests; scheduling Control flow analysis; Data flow analysis; Static single assignment;
aperiodic and sporadic jobs; slack stealing; resource access control Def-use and Use-def chains; Early optimizations – constant folding,
mechanics; priority ceiling protocols; multiprocessor scheduling; algebraic simplifications, value numbering, copy propagation, constant
scheduling flexible computations; real time communication; real propagation; Redundancy Elimination – dead code elimination,
time operating systems; real time embedded systems. loop invariant code motion, common sub-expression elimination;
Register Allocation; Scheduling – branch delay slot scheduling, list
COL722 Introduction to Compressed Sensing
scheduling, trace scheduling, software pipelining; Optimizing for
3 Credits (3-0-0)
memory hierarchy – code placement, scalar replacement of arrays,
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent register pipelining; Loop transformations – loop fission, loop fusion,
Sparsity, L1 minimization, Sparse regression, deterministic and loop permutation, loop unrolling, loop tiling; Function inlining and tail
probabilistic approaches to compressed sensing, restricted recursion; Dependence analysis; Just-in-time compilation; Garbage
isometry property and its application in sparse recovery, collection. Laboratory component would involve getting familiar with
robustness in the presence of noise, algorithms for compressed internal representations of compilers; profiling and performance
sensing. Applications in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), evaluation; and the design and implementation of novel compiler
applications in analog-to-digital conversion, low-rank matrix optimizations.
recovery, applications in image reconstruction.
COL730 parallel programming
COL724 Advanced Computer Networks
4 Credits (3-0-2)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, COL331
Pre-requisite(s): COL334 OR Equivalent
Parallel computer organization, Parallel performance analysis,
Review of the Internet architecture, layering; wired and wireless Scalability, High level Parallel programming models and framework,
MAC; intra- and inter-domain Internet routing, BGP, MPLS, MANETs; Load distribution and scheduling, Throughput, Latency, Memory and
error control and reliable delivery, ARQ, FEC, TCP; congestion and Data Organizations, Inter-process communication and synchronization,
flow control; QoS, scheduling; mobility, mobile IP, TCP and MAC Shared memory architecture, Memory consistency, Interconnection
interactions, session persistence; multicast; Internet topology, network and routing, Distributed memory architecture, Distributed
economic models of ISPs/CDNs/content providers; future directions. shared memory, Parallel IO, Parallel graph algorithms, Parallel
Algorithm techniques: Searching, Sorting, Prefix operations, Pointer
COL726 Numerical Algorithms
Jumping, Divide-and-Conquer, Partitioning, Pipelining, Accelerated
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Cascading, Symmetry Breaking, Synchronization (Locked/Lock-free).
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
COL731 Advanced Compiler Techniques for Optimization,
Overlaps with: MTL704
Safety and Security
Number representation, fundamentals of error analysis, conditioning,
4 Credits (3-0-2)
stability, polynomials and root finding, interpolation, singular value
decomposition and its applications, QR factorization, condition Pre-requisite(s): COL729 or equivalent
number, least squares and regression, Gaussian elimination, Polyhedral analysis for locality and parallelism transformations. The
eigenvalue computations and applications, iterative methods, linear topics will include the affine transform theory in the polyhedral
programming, elements of convex optimization including steepest framework, space-partitioning constraints and associated code-
descent, conjugate gradient, Newton’s method. generation algorithms, primitive affine transformations, and pipelining.
Lab work will include experimentation and development within
COL727 Rapid Mixing in Markov Chains
existing polyhedral analysis tools, such as LLVM's Polly; Undefined
Credits: 3 (3-0-0) Behaviour will be discussed in the context of performance-sensitive
programming languages such as C/C++/Rust/etc. The manifestation
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106
of Undefined Behaviour at the Intermediate Representation (IR) level
Basic of finite Markov chains; classical Markov Chains including
will be discussed through examples of real-world IRs such as LLVM
Coupon collection, Gambler’s Ruin, Polya’s um, Birth and Death
IR; Symbolic analysis approaches based on dataflow analysis/abstract
chains; Total Variation Distance; the Convergence Theorem; Mixing
interpretation will be introduced. Hoare logic and associated predicate
Time; bounding mixing time via couplings; bounding mixing time via
transformers (weakest-precondition, strongest-postcondition) will
strong stationary times; random walks on networks; bounding mixing
be introduced. Optionally, algorithms for automatic inference of
time via hitting times; cover times; spectral bounds on mixing time;
inductive invariants and bisimulations may be discussed. Optionally,
mixing time bounds via comparison between chains.
superoptimization techniques may be discussed too.
COL728 Compiler Design
4.5 Credits (3-0-3) COL732 Virtualization and Cloud Computing
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL 216, COL 226 OR Equivalent
Compilers and translators; lexical and syntactic analysis, top-down Pre-requisite(s): COL331
and bottom up parsing techniques; internal form of source programs; Introduction to Virtualization and Cloud Computing; Binary
semantic analysis, symbol tables, error detection and recovery, code Translation; Hardware Virtualization; Memory Resource Management
generation and optimization. Type checking and static analysis. Static in Virtual Machine Monitor; Application of Virtualization; Cloud-scale
analysis formulated as fixpoint of simultaneous semantic equations. Data Management and Processing; I/O Virtualization.
162

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Computer Science and Engineering
COL733 Cloud Computing Technology Fundamentals COL750 Foundations of Automatic Verification
4 Credits (3-0-2) 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL331 Pre-requisite(s): COL226, COL352 OR Equivalent
Overview of Cloud Computing, Virtualisation of CPU, Memory and I/O A selection from the following topics, and experiments with the
Devices; Storage Virtualisation and Software Defined Storage (SDS), mentioned tools: Review of first-order logic, syntax and semantics.
Software Defined Networks (SDN) and Network Virtualisation, Data Resolution theorem proving. Binary Decision Diagrams (BDDs) and
Centre Design and interconnection Networks, Cloud Architectures, their use in representing systems. (Programming exercises coding and
Public Cloud Platforms (Google App Engine, AWS, Azure), Cloud using logic programming frameworks). Transition systems, automata
Security and Trust Management, Open Source Clouds (Baadal, Open and transducers. Buechi and other automata on infinite words; Linear
Stack, Cloud Stack), Cloud Programming and Software Environments Time Temporal Logic (LTL), and specifying properties of systems in
(Hadoop, GFS, Map Reduce, NoSQL systems, Big Table, HBase, Libvirt, LTL; the relationship between temporal logic and automata on infinite
OpenVswitch), Amazon (Iaas), Azure (PaaS), GAE (PaaS) words, LTL Model checking (exercises using Spin or similar tools);
Computational Tree Logic (CTL and CTL*); CTL model checking
(exercises); Process calculi such as CSP and CCS. Notions of program
COL740 Software Engineering
equivalence -- traces, bisimulation and other notions. Hennessy-Milner
4 Credits (3-0-2) Logic (HML) and Mu calculus (exercises using tools such as CWB
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, COL226 -- Concurrency Work Bench). Symbolic model checking, exercises
using tools such as SMV. Sat-based model checking and Davis-Putnam
Introduction to Software Engineering, Software Life Cycle models and
procedure; (exercises using tools such as nuSMV). Possible additional
Processes, Requirement Engineering, System Models, Architectural
topics include: equational logic frameworks, real-time frameworks,
Design, Abstraction & Modularity, Structured Programming, Object-
reactive frameworks, pi-calculus (exercises using tools such as the
oriented techniques, Design Patterns, Service Oriented Architecture,
Mobility Workbench), Tree automata and Weak Second-order Logic
User Interface Design, Verification and Validation, Reliability, Software
with k successors (WSkS), (exercises using Mona or similar tools).
Evolution, Project Management & Risk Analysis, Software Quality
Management, Configuration Management,Software Metrics, Cost
Analysis and Estimation, Manpower Management, Organization and COL751 Algorithmic Graph Theory
Management of large Software Projects. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent
COD745 Minor project
Algorithms for computing maximum s-t flows in graphs: augmenting
3 Credits (0-0-6) path, blocking flow, push-relabel, capacity scaling etc. Max-flow
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 min-cut theorem and its applications. Algorithms for computing
min-cuts in graphs, structure of min-cuts. Min-cost flows and
Research and development projects based on problems of practical
applications: cycle cancelling algorithms, successive shortest paths,
and theoretical interest. Evaluation will be based on periodic
strongly polynomial algorithms. Maximum matching in bipartite and
presentations, student seminars, written reports, and evaluation of
general graphs: Hall’s theorem, Tutte’s theorem, Gallai-Edmonds
the developed system (if applicable).
decomposition. Weighted bipartite matching, Edmonds Algorithm
for Weighted Non-Bipartite Matching,T-joins and applications.
COp745 Digital System Design Laboratory Factor-Critical Graphs, Ear Decompositions, Graph orientations,
3 Credits (0-0-6) Splitting Off, k-Connectivity Orientations and Augmentations,
Arborescences and Branchings, Edmonds theorem for disjoint
Pre-requisite(s): COL215 OR Equivalent
arborescences. Planar graphs, algorithms for checking planarity,
Being primarily a laboratory course, it would consist of a series planar-separator theorem and its applications. Intersection graphs,
of assignments that would increase in complexity in terms of perfect graphs: polyhedral characterization, the strong perfect graph
designs to be carried out. Each assignment would involve learning theorem, kinds of perfect graphs and algorithms on them. Treewidth,
to translate starting from natural language specifications to HDL algorithm for computing tree width, algorithms on graphs with
design representation. The students would use modern synthesis bounded tree width.
techniques to realize these designs on FPGA boards before testing
them for functionality as well as performance. Students would also
COL752 Geometric Algorithms
be required to specify and implement a project (small system design)
as part of the course. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent
COL749 Computational Social Choice Geometric Fundamentals: Models of computation, lower bound
techniques, geometric primitives, geometric transforms Convex hulls:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Planar convex hulls, higher dimensional convex hulls, randomized,
Pre-requisite(s): COL202 (or MTL 180) & COL351 (or MTL342) output-sensitive, and dynamic algorithms, applications of convex
for UG hull, Intersection detection: segment intersection, line sweep, map
Matchings: Deferred-acceptance algorithm and lattice structure; overlay, halfspace intersection, polyhedra intersection, Geometric
strategic manipulation, LP approach for fair (median) stable searching: segment, interval, and priority-search trees, point location,
matchings: many-to-one matchings and rural hospitals theorem; persistent data structure, fractional cascading, range searching,
housing markets and kidney exchange; popular matchings. nearest-neighbor searching Proximity problems: closest pair, Voronoi
diagram, Delaunay triangulation and their subgraphs, spanners,
Fair Division: Proportional and envy-free cake cutting; rent division
well separated pair decomposition Arrangements: Arrangements
via Sperner's lemma; fair allocation of indivisible goods and chores;
of lines and hyperplanes, sweep-line and incremental algorithms,
Pareto optimality and Nash social welfare; fairness of randomised
lower envelopes, levels, and zones, applications of arrangements
allocations.
Triangulations: monotone and simple polygon triangulations,
Voting: Voting rules and axioms; strategic manipulation, Gibbard-
point-set triangulations, optimization criteria, Steiner triangulation,
Satterthwaite theorem, computational barriers against manipulation;
Delaunay refinement Geometric sampling: random sampling and
structured preferences.
ε-nets, ε-approximation and discrepancy, cuttings, coresetsGeometric
Modem paradigms: Multiwinner voting axioms and Thiele methods; optimization: linear programming, LP-type problems, parametric
rank aggregation via Kemeny rule, NP-hardness and approximation searching, approximation techniques. Implementation Issues: robust
algorithms; distortion of voting rules; participatory budgeting; liquid computing, perturbation techniques, floating-point filters, rounding
democracy: apportionment methods and paradoxes. techniques.
163

Computer Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
COL753 Complexity Theory algorithmic models Parallel models like PRAM and Interconnection
3 Credits (3-0-0) networks; Basic problems like Sorting, Merging, Routing, Parallel
Prefix and applications, graph algorithms like BFS, Matching Memory
Pre-requisite(s): COL352 OR Equivalent hierarchy models; Caching, Sorting, Merging, FFT, Permutation,
Modeling computation (Finite state machines, Non-determinism, Turing Lower bounds Data Structures - searching, Priority queues Streaming
machines, class P etc.), NP and NP-completeness, Diagonalization Data models: Distinct items, frequent items, frequency moments,
(Time hierarchy and Ladner’s theorem), Space complexity (PSPACE, estimating norms, clustering On line algorithms: competitive ratio,
NL, Savitch’s theorem, Immerman-Szelepcsényi theorem etc.), list accessing, paging, k-server, load-balancing, lower-bounds.
Polynomial hierarchy, Boolean circuits (P/poly), Randomized classes
(RP, BPP, ZPP, Adleman’s Theorem, Gács-Sipser-Lautemann Theorem), COL758 Advanced Algorithms
Interactive proofs (Arthur-Merlin, IP=PSPACE), Cryptography (one-way
4 Credits (3-0-2)
functions, pseudorandom generators, zero knowledge), PCP theorem
and hardness of approximation, Circuit lower bounds (Hastad’s Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent
switching lemma), Other topics (#P, Toda’s theorem, Average- Advanced data structures: self-adjustment, persistence and
case complexity, derandomization, pseudorandom construction). multidimensional trees. Randomized algorithms: Use of probabilistic
inequalities in analysis, Geometric algorithms: Point location, Convex
COL754 Approximation Algorithms hulls and Voronoi diagrams, Arrangements applications using
3 Credits (3-0-0) examples. Graph algorithms: Matching and Flows. Approximation
algorithms: Use of Linear programming and primal dual, Local search
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent
heuristics. Parallel algorithms: Basic techniques for sorting, searching,
NP-hardness and approximation algorithms. Different kinds of
merging, list ranking in PRAMs and Interconnection networks.
approximability. Greedy algorithm and local search with applications
in facility location, TSP and scheduling. Dynamic programming
COL759 Cryptography & Computer Security
with applications in knapsack, Euclidean TSP, bin packing. Linear
programming, duality and rounding. Applications in facility location, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Steiner tree and bin packing. Randomized rounding with applications. Pre-requisite(s): COL351, MTL106 OR Equivalent
Primal-dual algorithms and applications in facility location and network
Overlaps with: MTL730
design. Cuts and metrics with applications to multi-commodity flow.
Semi-definite programming and applications: max-cut, graph coloring. Part 1: Foundations: Perfect secrecy and its limitations, computational
Hardness of approximation. security, pseudorandom generators and one time encryption,
pseudorandom functions, one way permutations, message
COL755 Algorithmic Game Theory authentication and cryptographic hash functions.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Part 2: Basic Constructions and proofs: Some number theory,
symmetric key encryption, public key encryption, CPA and CCA security,
Pre-requisite(s): COL351
digital signatures, oblivious transfer, secure multiparty computation.
Games, Strategies, Costs, Payoff, Solution Concepts. Pure and
Part 3: Advanced Topics: Zero knowledge proofs, identity based
Mixed Nash Equilibria. Two player Zero-Sum Games and Proof of
encryption, broadcast encryption, homomorphic encryption, lattice
Nash Equilibria using Linear Programming Duality. Nash's theorem
based cryptography.
using FPT's. Complexity of finding Nash Equilibrium, Lemke Howson
Algorithm, The Class PPAD. Hierarchy of Equilibria, Best-case and
COL760 Advanced Data Management
strong Nash Equilibria, Best-response dynamics, and no-regret
dynamics. Social Choice, Arrow's and Gibbard-Satherthwaite 4 Credits (3-0-2)
theorems. Auctions and Optimal Mechanism Design, Myerson's
Pre-requisite(s): COL362 OR Equivalent
lemma, VCG mechanisms. Revenue maximizing Auctions. Inefficiency
Storage and file structures, advanced query processing and
of Equilibria. Price of Anarchy in network routing games, Atomic
optimization for single server databases, distributed data management
routing games, Potential function games. Mechanism Design without
(including distributed data storage, query processing and transaction
money: Stable matchings. Market equilibria and their computation,
management), web-data management (including managing the web-
Fisher's and Arrow-Debreu Models, Eisenberg-Gale convex program.
graph and implementation of web-search), big data systems.
COL756 Mathematical programming
COL761 Data Mining
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
Overlaps with: MTL103, MTL704
Association rule-mining, FP-tree, Prefix-span, Multi-support rule
Linear programming: introduction, geometry, duality, sensitivity
mining, Frequent subgraph mining (gSpan and FSG), Clustering
analysis. Simplex method, Large scale optimization, network simplex.
(Agglomerative clustering, k-means, k-medoid, DBSCAN, OPTICS,
Ellipsoid method, problems with exponentially many constraints,
CURE, BFR, MCL). Data streams (FM sketch, Reservoir sampling, top
equivalence of optimization and separation. Convex sets and functions
k-counting), Anomaly detection (Density based techniques, chi-square
– cones, hyperplanes, norm balls, generalized inequalities and
tests, p-values), Influence maximization in social networks, SimRank,
convexity, perspective and conjugate functions. Convex optimization
random walk with restarts, PageRank, HITS.
problems – quasi-convex, linear, quadratic, geometric, vector, semi-
definite. Duality – Lagrange, geometric interpretation, optimality COL762 Database Implementation
conditions, sensitivity analysis. Applications to approximation, fitting,
4 Credits (3-0-2)
statistical estimation, classification. Unconstrained minimization,
equality constrained minimization and interior point methods. Pre-requisite(s): COL362 OR Equivalent
Integer Programming: formulations, complexity, duality. Lattices, Review of Relational Model, Algebra and SQL, File structures,
geometry, cutting plane and branch and bound methods. Mixed Constraints and Triggers, System Aspects of SQL, Data Storage,
integer optimization. Representing Data Elements, Index, Multi dimensional and Bit-map
Indexes, Hashing, Query Execution, Query Compiler.
COL757 Model Centric Algorithm Design
4 Credits (3-0-2) COL764 Information Retrieval and Web Search
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent 4 Credits (3-0-2)
The RAM model and its limitations, Introduction to alternate Retrieval models (Boolean, vector-space, probabilistic, language-
164

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Computer Science and Engineering
model, Markov random fields, diversity-aware); Design of test learning algorithms: K-Means clustering, Gaussian Mixture Models,
collections (TREC, crowd-sourcing) and retrieval effectiveness Learning with Partially Observable Data (EM). Dimensionality
measures (micro-/macro-F measure, nDCG, BPref); Collection models Reduction and Principal Component Analysis. Bias Variance Trade-
(multinomial repr.; topic mixtures) and topic modeling (LSA/LSI, off. Model Selection and Feature Selection. Regularization. Learning
LDA); Search engine architecture (crawling, indexing, and web-page Theory. Introduction to Markov Decision Processes. Application
ranking); Learning to rank; Knowledge graphs; Responsible IR (e.g., to Information Retrieval, NLP, Biology and Computer Vision.
handling bias and fake-news, privacy, etc.). Advanced Topics.
COL765 Intro. To Logic and Functional programming COL775 Deep Learning
4 Credits (3-0-2) 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent Pre-requisite(s): Any one of ELL 409/ELL 774 / COL 341/ COL
Overlaps with: COL226 & COL703 333/ COL 671
Introduction to declarative programming paradigms. The functional Overlaps with: AIL721, APL745
style of programming, paradigms of developments of functional Basics: Introduction, Why Deep Learning, Multi-layered
programs, use of higher order functionals and pattern-matching. Perceptron, Neural Networks as Universal Function Approximators,
Introduction to lambda calculus. Interpreters for functional languages Backpropagation, Regularization, Ll-L2 Norms, Early Stopping,
and abstract machines for lazy and eager lambda calculi, Types, Dropouts. Optimization: Stochastic Gradient Descent, First-order
type-checking and their relationship to logic. Logic as a system and second order methods, Algorithms such as RMSProp, Adams,
for declarative programming. The use of pattern-matching and AdaGrad. Other Topics on Advanced Optimization. Convolutional
programming of higher order functions within a logic programming Networks (CNNs) - kernels, pooling operations, Applications to
framework. Introduction to symbolic processing. The use of Computer Vision. Recurrent Neural Networks, LSTMs, Attention,
resolution and theorem-proving techniques in logic programming. The Transformers, Language models: BERT, GPT2 etc. Applications in NLP.
relationship between logic programming and functional programming. Generative Models: Variational Auto-encoders, Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs). Graph Convolutional Networks, Graph Attention
COL768 Wireless Networks
Networks, and variations. Deep Reinforcement Learning - basics of
4 Credits (3-0-2) (Deep) RL, More Advanced topics such as visual question answering,
Pre-requisite(s): COL334 OR Equivalent Neuro-symbolic reasoning, self-supervised learning, Explainability and
Fairness, Domain Adaptation etc.
Radio signal propagation, advanced modulation and coding, medium
access techniques, self-configurable networks, mesh networks,
COL776 Learning probabilistic Graphical Models
cognitive radio and dynamic spectrum access networks, TCP over
4 Credits (3-0-2)
wireless, wireless security, emerging applications.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106 OR Equivalent
COL770 Advanced Artificial Intelligence
Basics: Introduction. Undirected and Directed Graphical Models.
4 Credits (3-0-2) Bayesian Networks. Markov Networks. Exponential Family Models.
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent Factor Graph Representation. Hidden Markov Models. Conditional
Random Fields. Triangulation and Chordal Graphs. Other Special
Overlap with: COL333, ELL789
Cases: Chains, Trees. Inference: Variable Elimination (Sum Product
Philosophy of artificial intelligence, fundamental and advanced search and Max-Product). Junction Tree Algorithm. Forward Backward
techniques (A*, local search, suboptimal heuristic search, search Algorithm (for HMMs). Loopy Belief Propagation. Markov Chain Monte
in AND/OR graphs), constraint optimization, temporal reasoning, Carlo. Metropolis Hastings. Importance Sampling. Gibbs Sampling.
knowledge representation and reasoning through propositional Variational Inference. Learning: Discriminative Vs. Generative
and first order logic, modern game playing (UCT), planning under Learning. Parameter Estimation in Bayesian and Markov Networks.
uncertainty (Topological value iteration, LAO*, LRTDP), reinforcement Structure Learning. EM: Handling Missing Data. Applications in Vision,
learning, introduction to robotics, introduction to probabilistic Web/IR, NLP and Biology. Advanced Topics: Statistical Relational
graphical models (Bayesian networks, Hidden Markov models, Learning, Markov Logic Networks.
Conditional random fields), machine learning, introduction to
information systems (information retrieval, information extraction). COL777 Deep Reinforcement Learning
4 Credits (3-0-2)
COL772 Natural Language processing
Pre-requisite(s): Any one of EEL409/EEL784/COL774/COL341/
4 Credits (3-0-2)
COL333/COL671
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent
Overlaps with: AIL722, ELL729
Overlaps with: MTL785
Introduction and Basics of RL, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs),
NLP concepts: Tokenization, lemmatization, part of speech tagging,
Dynamic Programming, Monte Carlo Methods (Prediction), Temporal
noun phrase chunking, named entity recognition, co-reference
difference Methods (Prediction), Monte Carlo, TD Method (Control),
resolution, parsing, information extraction, sentiment analysis,
N-step TD, Eligibility Traces, Model based RL, (Action-)Value Function
question answering, text classification, document clustering,
Approximation, Value Function Approximation, Policy Gradient, Policy
document summarization, discourse, machine translation.
Gradient, Recent Applications, Misc./Advanced Topics.
Machine learning concepts: Naïve Bayes, Hidden Markov Models, EM,
Conditional Random Fields, MaxEnt Classifiers, Probabilistic Context COL778 principles of Autonomous Systems
Free Grammars.
Credits: 4 (3-0-2)
COL774 Machine Learning Pre-requisite(s): Any one of COL333 / COL774 / ELL784 /
4 Credits (3-0-2) ELL409
Intelligent Agent/Robot Representation. Software and simulation
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106 OR Equivalent
tools. Classical Planning. Anytime and incremental search. Decision-
Overlaps with: COL341 ELL784, ELL888 making under Uncertainty. Reinforcement Learning. Imitation learning.
Supervised learning algorithms: Linear and Logistic Regression, State Estimation using Bayesian Networks. Particle Filtering. World
Gradient Descent, Support Vector Machines, Kernels, Artificial Neural Representations. Map representations. Exploration and coverage.
Networks, Decision Trees, ML and MAP Estimates, K-Nearest Neighbor, Interaction and Intent Inference. Execution and monitoring. Advanced
Naive Bayes, Introduction to Bayesian Networks. Unsupervised epics and case study. Programming Assignments.
165

Computer Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
COL780 Computer Vision acceleration, Interfaces, Device Drivers, Network, Security, Debug
4 Credits (3-0-2) support, Performance tuning. The course would involve substantial
programming assignments on embedded platforms.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 80
Overlaps with: ELL793 COL787 Online Algorithms and Competitive Analysis
Camera models. Calibration, multi-views projective geometry and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
invariants. Feature detection, correspondence and tracking. 3D
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 / MTL342 for UG students
structure/motion estimation. Application of machine learning in
object detection and recognition, category discovery, scene and Introduction to online computation and competitive analysis, design
activity interpretation. and analysis of online algorithms, impossibility results, randomization
in online computation, memoryless algorithms, potential functions,
linear programming duality and applications to online algorithms,
COL781 Computer Graphics
work functions, online learning, stochastic online problems
4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 OR Equivalent COS799 Independent Study
Overlaps with: ELL792 3 Credits (0-3-0)
Graphics pipeline; Graphics hardware: Display devices, Input devices; The student will be tasked with certain reading assignments and
Raster Graphics: line and circle drawing algorithms; Windowing and related problem solving in a appropriate area of research in Computer
2D/3D clipping: Cohen and Sutherland line clipping, Cyrus Beck Science under the overall guidance of a CSE Faculty member. The
clipping method; 2D and 3D Geometrical Transformations: scaling, work will be evaluated through term paper.
translation, rotation, reflection; Viewing Transformations: parallel
and perspective projection; Curves and Surfaces: cubic splines, COL812 System Level Design and Modelling
Bezier curves, B-splines, Parametric surfaces, Surface of revolution,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Sweep surfaces, Fractal curves and surfaces; Hidden line/surface
removal methods; illuminations model; shading: Gouraud, Phong; Pre-requisite(s): COL719
Introduction to Ray-tracing; Animation; Programming practices with Embedded systems and system-level design, models of
standard graphics libraries like openGL. computation, specification languages, hardware/software co-
design, system partitioning, application specific processors and
COL783 Digital Image Analysis memory, low power design.
4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
COL818 principles of Multiprocessor Systems
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, ELL205 OR Equivalent
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Overlap with: ELL715
Pre-requisite(s): COL216, COL351, COL331 OR Equivalent
Digital Image Fundamentals; Image Enhancement in Spatial Domain:
Mutual Exclusion, Coherence and Consistency, Register Constructions ,
Gray Level Transformation, Histogram Processing, Spatial Filters;
Power of Synchronization Operations , Locks and Monitors, Concurrent
Image Transforms: Fourier Transform and their properties, Fast Fourier
queues, Futures and Work-Stealing, Barriers, Basics of Transactional
Transform, Other Transforms; Image Enhancement in Frequency
Memory (TM), Regular Hardware TMs, Unbounded HadwareTMs,
Domain; Color Image Processing; Image Warping and Restoration;
Software TMs.
Image Compression; Image Segmentation: edge detection, Hough
transform, region based segmentation; Morphological operators;
COL819 Advanced Distributed Systems
Representation and Description; Features based matching and Bayes
classification; Introduction to some computer vision techniques: 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Imaging geometry, shape from shading, optical flow; Laboratory
Pre-requisite(s): COL331, COL334, COL380 OR Equivalent
exercises will emphasize development and evaluation of image
Epidemic/Gossip based algorithms, Peer to peer networks, Distributed
processing methods.
hash tables, Synchronization, Mutual exclusion, Leader election,
Distributed fault tolerance, Large scale storage systems, Distributed
COL785 Virtual and Augmented Reality file systems, Design of social networking systems.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 COp820 processor Design Laboratory
Modeling of VR environments, Basics of lighting and shading, VR/ 4 Credits (0-0-8)
AR devices and technology, software modules in a VR application, Pre-requisite(s): COL718
Interaction and manipulation techniques, Locomotion, wayfinding,
This is a pure laboratory course that invloves the following activities.
and orientation in 3D, Multi-user VR and Social interaction.
Design of branch predictors, instruction fetch logic, Decode and
rename logic, Instruction window and scheduler, Select logic,
COL786 Advanced Functional Brain Imaging Load-square queue, ALUs and by-pass paths, Instruction commit
4 Credits (3-0-2) logic, Misprediction and recovery techniques, Selective replay
techniques.
Introduction to human Neuro-anatomy, Hodgkin Huxley model,
overview of brain imaging methods, introduction to magnetic
resonance imaging, detailed fMRI, fMRI data analysis methods, COL821 Reconfigurable Computing
general linear model, network analysis, machine learning based 3 Credits (3-0-0)
methods of analysis.
Pre-requisite(s): COL719
FPGA architectures, CAD for FPGAs: overview, LUT mapping, timing
COL788 Advanced Topics in Embedded Computing
analysis, placement and routing, Reconfigurable devices - from
3 Credits (3-0-0) fine-grained to coarse-grained devices, Reconfiguration modes
and multi-context devices, Dynamic reconfiguration, Compilation
Pre-requisite(s): COL216, COL331 OR Equivalent
from high level languages, System level design for reconfigurable
Overlaps with: ELL782 systems: heuristic temporal partitioning and ILP-based temporal
Embedded Platforms, Embedded processor architectures, System partitioning, Behavioral synthesis, Reconfigurable example systems’
initialization, Embedded operating systems (linux) , DSP and graphics tool chains.
166

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Computer Science and Engineering
COL828 Advanced Computer Vision COL860 Special Topics in parallel Computation
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL780 or COL783 or ELL793 or ELL715 The course will focus on research issues in areas like parallel
computation models, parallel algorithms, Parallel Computer
Advanced topic in computer vision: data sources, features, and
architectures and interconnection networks, Shared memory
learning algorithms useful for understanding and manipulating visual
parallel architectures and programming with OpenMP and Ptheards,
data. Advanced architectures for image classification and visualization
Distributed memory message-passing parallel architectures and
of CNNs for image analysis, traditional and modern techniques for
programming, portable parallel message-passing programming
object detection, image segmentation, image synthesis, and object
using MPI. This will also include design and implementation of
tracking. Attack and defense techniques for computer vision systems.
parallel numerical and non-numerical algorithms for scientific and
Contemporary. Interdisciplinary topics (vision+x) such as vision and
engineering, and commercial applications. Performance evaluation
language.
and benchmarking high-performance computers.
COL829 Advanced Computer Graphics
4 Credits (3-0-2) COL861 Special Topics in Hardware Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL781
Under this topic one of the following areas will be covered:
Rendering: Ray tracing, Radiosity methods, Global illumination
Fault Detection and Diagnosability. Special Architectures. Design
models, Shadow generation, Mapping, Anti-aliasing, Volume
Automation Issues. Computer Arithmetic, VLSI.
rendering, Geometrical Modeling: Parametric surfaces, Implicit
surfaces, Meshes, Animation: spline driven, quarternions, articulated
structures (forward and inverse kinematics), deformation- purely COL862 Special Topics in Software Systems
geometric, physically-based, Other advanced topics selected from 3 Credits (3-0-0)
research papers.
Special topic that focuses on state of the art and research problems
of importance in this area.
COL830 Distributed Computing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
COL863 Special Topics in Theoretical Computer Science
Pre-requisite(s): COL226 OR Equivalent 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Models of Distributed Computing; Basic Issues: Causality, Exclusion,
Pre-requisite(s): COL351
Fairness, Independence, Consistency; Specification of Distributed
Under this topic one of the following areas will be covered: Design
Systems: Transition systems, petri nets, process algebra properties:
and Analysis of Sequential and Parallel Algorithms. Complexity
Safety, Liveness, stability.
issues, Trends in Computer Science Logic, Quantum Computing and
COL831 Semantics of programming Languages Bioinformatics, Theory of computability. Formal Languages. Semantics
and Verification issues.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL226, COL352
COL864 Special Topics in Artificial Intelligence
Study of operational, axiomatic and denotational semantics of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
procedural languages; semantics issues in the design of functional
and logic programming languages, study of abstract data types. Pre-requisite(s): COL333 / COL671 / Equivalent
Potential topics or themes which may be covered (one topic per
COL832 proofs and Types offering) include: information extraction, industrial applications of
3 Credits (3-0-0) AI, advanced logic-based AI, Markov Decision Processes, statistical
relational learning, etc.
Pre-requisite(s): COL226, COL352
Syntax and semantic foundations: Ranked algebras, homomorphisms,
COL865 Special Topics in Computer Applications
initial algebras, congruences. First-order logic review: Soundness,
completeness, compactness. Herbrand models and Herbrand’s 3 Credits (3-0-0)
theorem, Horn-clauses and resolution. Natural deduction and the Pre-requisite(s): Permission of the Instructor
Sequent calculus. Normalization and cut elimination. Lambda-calculus
Special topic that focuses on special topics and research problems
and Combinatory Logic: syntax and operational semantics (beta-eta
of importance in this area.
equivalence), confluence and Church-Rosser property. Introduction
to Type theory: The simply-typed lambda-calculus, Intuitionistic type
COL866 Special Topics in Algorithms
theory. Curry-Howard correspondence. Polymorphism, algorithms
for polymorphic type inference, Girard and Reynolds’ System 3 Credits (3-0-0)
F. Applications: type-systems for programming languages; modules Pre-requisite(s): COL 351 OR Equivalent
and functors; theorem proving, executable specifications.
The course will focus on specialized topics in areas like Computational
Topology, Manufacturing processes, Quantum Computing,
COL851 Special Topics in Operating Systems
Computational Biology, Randomized algorithms and other research
3 Credits (3-0-0) intensive topics.
Pre-requisite(s): COL331 Or Equivalent
To provide insight into current research problems in the area COL867 Special Topics in High Speed Networks
of operating systems. Topics may include, but are not limited 3 Credits (3-0-0)
to, OS design, web servers, Networking stack, Virtualization,
Pre-requisite(s): COL334 OR COL672
Cloud Computing, Distributed Computing, Parallel Computing,
The course will be delivered through a mix of lectures and paper
Heterogeneous Computing, etc.
reading seminars on advanced topics in Computer Networks. Hands-
COL852 Special Topics in COMpILER DESIGN on projects will be conceptualized to challenge students to take
up current research problems in areas such as software defined
3 Credits (3-0-0)
networking, content distribution, advanced TCP methodologies,
Pre-requisite(s): COL728/COL729 delay tolerant networking, data center networking, home networking,
Special topic that focuses on state of the art and research problems green networking, clean state architecture for the Internet, Internet
of importance in this area. of things, etc.
167

Computer Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
COL868 Special topics in Database Systems COL876 Special Topics in Formal Methods
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL334 / COL672 / Equivalent Pre-requisite(s): COL765 or (COL703+COL226)
The contents would include specific advanced topics in Database The course will focus on one or more specialised research topics
Management Systems in which research is currently going on in in: Model-checking; theorem-proving; rewriting; abstractions and
the department. These would be announced every time the course abstraction refinement; formal frameworks for specification and
is offered. modelling; game-theoretic techniques; verification of probabilistic
systems; Markov decision processes; symbolic-, abstraction-
COL869 Special topics in Concurrency and automata-based methods and algorithms for the verification
of hardware, software, hybrid, real-time, concurrent and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
distributed systems.
The course will focus on research issues in concurrent, distributed
and mobile computations. Models of Concurrent, Distributed and
Mobile computation. Process calculi, Event Structures, Petri Nets COL886 Special Topics in Operating Systems
an labeled transition systems. Implementations of concurrent and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
mobile, distributed programming languages. Logics and specification
Special topic that focuses on the state of the art and research
models for concurrent and mobile systems. Verification techniques
problems of importance in this area.
and algorithms for model checking. Type systems for concurrent/
mobile programming languages. Applications of the above models
and techniques. COV876 Special Module on Automated Reasoning
Methods for program Analysis
COL870 Special Topics in Machine Learning
Course Categories: DE for CSI. PE for CS5. PE(SS) for MCS.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL341 OR Equivalent
Pre-requisite(s): EC100 for UG
Contents may vary based on the instructor’s expertise and interests
Through the course students will (1) get exposure to fundamental
within the broader area of Machine Learning. Example topics include
concepts in building automated reasoning tools to support deployment
(but not limiting to) Statistical Relational Learning, Markov Logic,
of formal methods for software and cyber physical systems, (2) get
Multiple Kernel Learning, Multi-agent Systems, Multi-Class Multi-
an overview of the advanced state of the art approaches towards
label Learning, Deep Learning, Sum-Product Networks, Active and
building automated reasoning tools, (3) learn about foundational
Semi-supervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Dealing with
aspects so as to prepare them to pursue these topics and related
Very High-Dimensional Data, Learning with Streaming Data, Learning
literature independently for research and use in system design and
under Distributed Architecture.
other applications and (4) become aware of exciting new directions
in research on software and system analysis, particularly techniques
COL871 Special Topics in programming Languages
for automatically generating invariant properties.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL765 or (COL226+COL202)
COV877 Special Module on Visual Computing
The course will focus on one or more specialised research topics
1 Credit (1-0-0)
such as Operational and Denotational Semantics, Domain Specific
The course will be a seminar-based course where the instructor would
Languages, Types Systems, Flow Analysis, Abstract Interpretation,
present topics in a selected theme in the area of visual computing
Static Analysis, Program Synthesis, etc.
through research papers. Students will also be expected to participate
in the seminar.
COL872 Special Topics in Cryptography
3 Credits (3-0-0)
COV878 Special Module in Machine Learning
Pre-requisite(s): COL759 OR Equivalent
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Contents may vary based on the instructor’s interests within
the broader area of Cryptography. Examples include CCA secure Contents may vary based on the instructor’s expertise and interests
encryption, multiparty computation, leakage resilient cryptography, within the broader area of Machine Learning. Example topics include
broadcast encryption, fully homomorphic encryption, obfuscation, (but not limiting to) Statistical Relational Learning, Markov Logic,
functional encryption, zero knowledge, private information retrieval, Multiple Kernel Learning, Multi-agent Systems, Multi-Class Multi-
byzantine agreement, cryptography against extreme attacks etc. label Learning, Deep Learning, Sum-Product Networks, Active and
Semi-supervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Dealing with
Very High-Dimensional Data, Learning with Streaming Data, Learning
COL873 Special Topics in Natural Language processing
under Distributed Architecture.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL772
COV879 Special Module in Financial Algorithms
The course will focus on one or two specialised research topics such
1 Credit (1-0-0)
as conversational systems, question answering, semantic parsing,
representation learning, linguistics in machine learning, automated Pre-requisite(s): MTL106 OR Equivalent
summarisation systems, etc.
Overlap with: MTL 732 & MTL 733
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
COL874 Special Topics in Compilers and Language
of importance in this area.
Implementation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
COV880 Special Module in parallel Computation
Pre-requisite(s): COL765 or (COL226+COL202)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
The course will focus on one or more specialised research topics such
as Runtime Environments, Dynamic Analysis, Runtime Monitoring and Pre-requisite(s): Permission of Instructor
Verification, Code Optimisation, Code Generation, Machine Program Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
Synthesis, etc. of importance in this area.
168

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Computer Science and Engineering
COV881 Special Module in Hardware Systems networking, green networking, clean state architecture for the
1 Credit (1-0-0) Internet, Internet of things, etc.
Pre-requisite(s): Permission of Instructor COV888 Special Module in Database Systems
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems 1 Credit (1-0-0)
of importance in this area.
Pre-requisite(s): COL362 OR COL632 OR Equivalent
COV882 Special Module in Software Systems Potential topics or themes which may be covered (one topic per
1 Credit (1-0-0) offering) include: data mining, big data management, information
retrieval and database systems, semantic web data management, etc.
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
of importance in this area.
COV889 Special Module in Concurrency
COV883 Special Module in Theoretical Computer Science 1 Credit (1-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0) Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
of importance in this area.
Pre-requisite(s): COL 351 OR equivalent
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems COD891 M.Tech. Minor project
of importance in this area. 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Research and development oriented projects based on problems of
COV884 Special Module in Artificial Intelligence
practical and theoretical interest. Evaluation done based on periodic
1 Credit (1-0-0) presentations, student seminars, written reports, and evaluation of
Pre-requisite(s): COL333 / COL671 / Equivalent the developed system (if applicable). Students are generally expected
to work towards the goals and mile stones set for Minor Project
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
COP 891.
of importance in this area.
COD892 M.Tech. project part-I
COV885 Special Module in Computer Applications
7 Credits (0-0-14)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
It is expected that the problem specification and milestones to be
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems
achieved in solving the problem are clearly specified. Survey of the
of importance in this area.
related area should be completed. This project spans also the course
COV886 Special Module in Algorithms COP892. Hence it is expected that the problem specification and the
milestones to be achieved in solving the problem are clearly specified.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): COL351 OR Equivalent COD893 M.Tech. project part-II
Special module that focuses on special topics and research problems 14 Credits (0-0-28)
of importance in this area.
Pre-requisite(s): COD 892
COV887 Special Module in High Speed Networks The student(s) who work on a project are expected to work towards
the goals and milstones set in COP893. At the end there would be a
1 Credit (1-0-0)
demonstration of the solution and possible future work on the same
Pre-requisite(s): COL 334 OR COl 672 problem. A dissertation outlining the entire problem, including a
The course will be delivered through a mix of lectures and paper survey of literature and the various results obtained along with their
reading seminars on advanced topics in Computer Networks. solutions is expected to be produced by each student.
Students will be introduced to topics such as software defined
networking, content distribution, advanced TCP methodologies, COD895 MS Research project
delay tolerant networking, data center networking, home 36 Credits (0-0-72)
169

Department of Design
DDL110 Understanding Design and Design Movements DDL123 Applied Ergonomics
3 Credits (2-0-2) 2 Credits (1-0-2)
• Design exercises in a given context, making quick and dirty Introduction to Ergonomics and human factors engineering,
prototypes, acting, skit anthropometry, human errors, accidents and safety, design of displays,
• Frugal model making, presentation through paper models design of hand tools and devices, design of controls, human controls
• History of design & systems, design for usability.
• Design movements
• Indian design history DDL124 Design with Contemporary Technologies
2 Credits (1-0-2)
DDL111 Visualization Techniques
3 Credits (1-0-4)
DDL125 Elements of Design
Fundamentals of sketching for designers. Sketching materials,
3 Credits (1-0-4)
purpose and significance of sketching. Line quality, strokes,
sketching geometrical figures, shades and shadow, rendering, light 2D, geometry, radii transformation, form from constraints, image
and reflection. Sketching of nature, sketching of humans, objects. board, mood board, theme board, building persona, form and
Documenting your sketches. emotions, positioning of form as per product category, introduction
to types and typography, practically apply form on a 2D, 3D spaces.
DDL112 Design process
2 Credits (1-0-2) DDD120 Design project-I
Exercises to understand every step of design process. 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Problem identification and validation, needs formulation and
DDp113 Computer Aided Visualization
evaluation, solution generation, evaluation and selection, prototype
2 Credits (0.5-0-3) development and evaluation.
Basic introduction to visualization and modelling tools for creating 3D
concepts and components. Understanding CAD packages for creating DDL126 Typography and Layout
basic 3D concepts. Introduction to design and rendering software 3 Credits (1-0-4)
like adobe suite, Rhino, Alias, etc. Typography for visual communication, type and letterforms, type
semantics, western and Indic scripts, type classification, type-tour,
DDp114 Materials & processes for Model Making
type documentation, type designing.
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Introduction to various model-making techniques to express product DDL211 Materials and prototyping
concepts, developing familiarity and sensitivity towards handling
3 Credits (1-0-4)
material leading towards the finishing of a product. Develop estimation
Understanding properties and selection of natural and manmade
and sense of detailing through accuracy and measurement. Providing
materials including metals, plastics, ceramics, composites and natural
basic knowledge of different model making materials.
materials.
DDL115 Design Thinking and Design Critique Understanding various manufacturing and prototyping methods
Hands-on exposure to working with MDF, PU Foam, HIPS, Acrylic,
2 Credits (1-0-2)
foam board collaborating with expertise from different fields wherever
What is thinking? Role of metaphors, rationality, empirical and required to make a complete working model.
system. Thinking method of inductive, deductive, seductive,
abductive thinking. Fallacies in logical thinking. Design thinking as a
DDL212 Advanced Visualization Techniques
comprehensive & holistic thinking process. The nine stages of design
3 Credits (1-0-4)
thinking. Understand, observe, POV, ideate, prototype, test, narrative
building, pilot, business model. Exploration through uncertainty to Use of software’s and hardware’s for digital sketching and rendering,
certainty. Methods to help discover pain points and opportunities. installation, proper usage and efficiency in use of digital medium, line
Methods to help define a problem. Methods to help generate and strokes, tilt angle, corrections in digital medium, lights shades and
evaluate solutions. Methods to prototype select solutions. Posting shadow in digital medium, perspective and settings in digital medium.
critique in general and for design in particular. Design critique case
studies. Studio exploration. DDL213 CAD and Digital prototyping
3 Credits (1-0-4)
DDL116 Fundamentals of Design
Exercises drawing and 3D modeling, modeling free-form geometries
3 Credits (1-0-4)
and digital sculpting, reverse engineering (Artifact to CAD¬)
Introduction to elements of design, point, line, plane and shape, Geometric and product data exchange, rendering and texturing,
geometry and design, design from nature, gestalt, Golden ratio, computer animation in 2D and 3D.
Fibonacci series, color theory, color wheel, Texture, 2D, 3D grid
systems and its application. DDL214 Engineering for Designers
2 Credits (1-0-2)
DDL121 product Visualization Techniques
Mechanisms and its use for designers, innovative application of
3 Credits (1-0-4)
mechanisms, structural packaging, value engineering, significance
Thinking through sketch, sketching of ideas and design intent,
and application, electrical circuitry design, working with Arduino,
sketching scenarios and storyboarding, instructional drawings,
future of engineering.
presentation of concept sketches, rendering by different mediums,
sketching for animation.
DDL215 Design for Future
DDL122 Exploratory Design Methods 2 Credits (1-0-2)
2 Credits (1-0-2) Pre-requisite(s): Combinations of Courses: e.g. (XYZ123 &
Design for assembly, design for manufacturability, component XYW214) / XYZ234
design, and design for serviceability. Product development process, Emerging technologies and its adaptation for designers, designers of
materials used for manufacturing, reverse engineering, 3D scanning, future, life in 2030-2050, resources of future, population of future,
understanding electric and electronic circuits. empathy in future markets, market place of future, societies of future.
170

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Design
DDp216 Art and Craft practicum predefined spaces, and how to manipulate them. How to create spaces
1 Credit (0-0-2) that evoke a certain desired mood, spaces that influence a certain
behaviour, spaces that communicate a concept, etc.
Individual or collaborative exercises involving one or more of art and
craft forms such as but not limited to pottery, weaving, stitching,
DDD310 Design project: 3 (Collaborative Design
embroidery, puppetry, sculpting, paper crafts.
project)
DDL217 photography, Illustration and Moving Images 4 Credits (0-0-8)
3 Credits (2-0-2) Pre-requisite(s): students should have completed core design
Illustration, its practice and applications, classifications of illustration, courses up to 4th semester successfully.
photography basics, handling materials, images in society, narrative Aim of the project to help the students independently solved a design
structures, stop-motion animation, motion graphics, video and film problem against a pre-identify design brief.
making.
DDL311 Branding-Identity and packaging Design
DDL222 Design Research Methods 3 Credits (1-0-4)
2 Credits (1-0-2) Word and image, semiotics of images, case studies, identity systems,
Tools of design research, from-human centered research methods, branding systems, packaging design, graphics for packaging.
formal experimentation, process models, and application to real world
design problems, investigate people, form, and process in ways that DDL312 Design for Developing Nations
can make their work more potent and more delightful, qualitative 3 Credits (1-0-4)
and quantitative methods, performance ethnography and design
Developing nation and their common problems, population and
improvisation, trend research, cultural diversity, formal and structural
livelihood, growing energy supply and demand, dealing with health
research practice, tactical discussions of design research process,
and diseases, irrigation, agriculture and food, water usage and
and case studies drawn from areas like computer games, museum
portable water, crime, abuse law and order, business opportunities.
information systems, and movies, statical tools (SPSS).
DDL313 Creativity and Sustainability in Nature
DDL223 Cognitive Ergonomics
3 Credits (1-0-4)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Sustainability, triple bottom line, design for environment, design
Pre-requisite(s): DDL123 for recycle, reuse, reduce, Eco design, circular economy, tools and
Design control and display systems, human perception, error, techniques for eco design, case studies on design for environment,
reliability, information processing and awareness, attentional issues biomimicry, taking inspiration from environment.
in head-up displays, human factors issues in air traffic management.
Psychology of the individual. Mistakes in road vehicles. DDL314 Designing for Society & Culture
3 Credits (1-0-4)
DDL224 Storytelling and Film Making
Understanding societies, social and cultural context, societies in india,
3 Credits (2-0-2) formation of land settlements, historical moorings and formation of
The art of storytelling, history and practice of storytelling, storytelling the Indian society, caste and caste system, ethnicity, civil society,
and its relevance in professional world, public speaking, TED talks multiculturalism, women and society, village india, urbanization and
and storytelling business, design and storytelling, storytelling and its social movements, Indian food in its many incarnations, virtues of
significance for business, mythology and storytelling. a traditional Indian diet, contemporary Indian social experiences
DDL225 Market Research and Trend Analysis DDL315 Design for UI/UX
2 Credits (1-0-2) 3 Credits (1-0-4)
Expanding into emerging markets, distribution channels in emerging Introduction to UI/UX approach in design. Design process for UI/
markets, advertising and its relationship with design, ecosystem UX. Model of users behaviors. Cognitive, affective and cultural
mapping to define the elements impacting innovation and design perspectives in UI/UX. Introduction to UI/UX strategy. Exercises in
decisions, marketing basics for designers, marketing campaign, creation of users interfacings and testing of digital products from
mapping out strategy, design thinking and business challenges. experiential perspective. Introduction to evaluation methods in UI/UX.
DDL226 System Oriented Design DDD320 Design project-2 (Simple product Design)
2 Credits (1-0-2) 4 Credits (0-0-8)
Concept of modularity in systems design; Connected and Pre-requisite(s): DDL111, DDL116, DDL125, DDL121, DDL211,
interconnected systems; Process models in systems design, systems DDL213
design approaches.
Observation, developing questionnaires, conducting interviews,
analysis of the present situation, understanding user needs, identifying
DDR227 Social Immersion
product/system gaps, ideation - including freehand sketching of
2 Credits (0-0-4) possible design solutions, creating multiple formal options, making
Visit to identified social immersion location and study of societal quick bread board models in paper/foam/mdf for volumetric analysis;
needs. Documentation of social needs through photography, creating 2D drawings in CAD, modelling in 3D computer renders and
videography, doodles and sketches. Identification of ergonomic, environment simulation, finalization and detailing of the concept
usability, utilitarian, culture, psychological or physiological issues in in terms of material and processes, assembly techniques; making
tasks that people perform in the societal context and brainstorm on detailed and accurate components using appropriate model making
the possible solutions. Presentation of the social needs and likely techniques; detailed and comprehensive presentation about the
solutions in report/presentation/video etc. product and its features; scratch film.
DDL228 Exhibition and Space Design DDL321 Model Making
3 Credits (1-0-4) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): DDL111, DDL116, DDL125 Pre-requisite(s): DDL211, DDL213
Understanding factors that influence human behaviour within Understanding and practicing idea-to product through physical
171

Design Courses of Study 2024-2025
modeling and prototyping. This course provides the means to physical DDp712 Exhibitions and Environmental Design
manifestation of CAD models and drawings in the most efficient 3 Credits (2-0-2)
manner possible. Validation of envisaged manufacturing and assembly
History of exhibition design. Human movements and exhibition plans.
techniques for the conceived product.
Concept of physical and psychological space. Design of physical
environment for human comfort and function. Study of fixtures and
DDR324 Industry Internship
fittings. Design and use of modular and fixed elements in display
2 Credits (0-0-4) design. Lights and illumination systems. Types of lights. Study of
The internship should enable the design students to observe and indoor and outdoor lighting requirements. Innovative materials and
participate in design practices in business environment. The student processes in exhibitions. Outdoor and indoor land-scaping. Types
should be able to identify scope and needs of different design skills of pavilions. Space requirement calculation in design. Design of
and gain confidence in being able to practice design independently. murals, artifacts, exhibits and models. Use of background, negative
space, foreground, proportion and scale in exhibition composition.
DDD410 Design project 4 (Dissertation project/Thesis) Exercises and projects.
6 Credits (0-0-12)
DDL715 Animation Design
Problem identification and validation, needs formulation and
3 Credits (1-0-4)
evaluation, solution generation, evaluation and selection.
History of animation design, the animation industry, sketching
DDL411 Design Management and IpR for animation design, digital sketching and motion graphics, 2D
animation, 3D animation, body movements and kinematics, traditional
2 Credits (1-0-2)
animation, animation film making.
Introduction to business context of design and need for management
of design practices. Stakeholders of design practices in industry. DDL716 Storybook Design
Positioning and reposition of design products in market. Disruptive
3 Credits (2-0-2)
innovation. Calculation of return on investment. Entrepreneurship
development, formation of company (startup). Intellectual property Storybook genres, storybook visual styles, handling media, layout
rights, design registration, patent and copyright. design and printing.
DDp721 Design and Innovation Methods
DDR422 Design Degree Show
3 Credits (1-0-4)
2 Credits (0-0-4)
1. Understanding of factors that directly or indirectly influence the
Design of exhibition in CAD. Presentation and iterative cycles of
product definition and its context. Assessing relevance of available
redesign / review. Finally, execution of selected designs as a group
products in the futuristic context. 2. Research planning strategies,
project of the class.
finding real challenges, Methods of Exploring design situations,
developing questionnaires for interviewing users. 3. Searching for
DDD510 Design project 5 (Dissertation project / Thesis,
visual inconsistencies, 4. Creativity methods, Brainstorming, Synectics,
Continued)
5. Issue Tree, Mind Mapping, 6. Story Boarding, Image boarding 7. Six-
9 Credits (0-0-18) Thinking Hats, Harvey Cards, Lotus Blossom, COCD, 8. Lateral Thinking,
Develop and evaluate a working prototype, document the outcome Wishful Thinking. 9. Specification writing, 10. Methods of exploring
in a well-articulated thesis. problem structure, Product-environment and Product-component
interaction, 11. Alexanders method of determining components,
DDD620 Design project 6 (Industry/Research project) 12. Interaction Matrix and net, 13. Analysis of interconnected
13 Credits (0-0-26) decision areas, System innovation, 14. Functional Innovation by
boundary shifting, through boundary searching and experimentation.
Problem identification and validation in association with an industry, a
faculty for industry relevant problem, identify needs formulation and DDp722 Applied Ergonomics
evaluation, solution generation, evaluation and selection, prototype
2 Credits (1-0-2)
development and evaluation.
Definition, origin, scope and goals of ergonomics as a field of study.
DDL710 Framework of Design Examples of applications of ergonomics in design. Types of data from
human at physical, physiological, cognitive and affective levels. Data
2 Credits (2-0-0)
gathering and analysis techniques. Use of descriptive and inferential
Definition of design as an industrial and social activity. Understanding
statistics in ergonomic data. Applications of mean, median, mode and
of ‘design’ as a noun and as a verb. Design as a case of ill structured,
percentile in anthropometry. Use of anthropometry in workstation
ill defined, ill constrained problem solving. Comparative study of
design. Human physiological potentials and limitations in terms of load
production processes in art, engineering and design. Design as
carrying capacity. Concept of comfort, fatigue and stress. Design for
cycle of analysis, synthesis, and validation of ideas. Design as the
the cognitive user. Concept of mental workload. Cognitive perspective
meeting point of the user needs, technology affordance and business
in control panel design and graphical user interface design.
goals. History of art and design. Influence of society and culture on
design. Study of successful and failed products. Study of evolution of DSL724 Qualitative and Quantitative Methods in Design
designed products. Consideration of advertising, marketing, consumer
3 Credits (2-0-2)
satisfaction, prevalent expertise, economic viability, production
Introduction to statistical methods Survey methodology for user
ecosystem, future prediction, legal and statutory concerns, IPR issues
research, different sampling techniques, sample size determination.
in design success.
Hypothesis testing, Design of experiments, Regression analysis.
Market research using forecasting techniques based on econometric
DDp711 Computer Aided product Detailing
modeling, statistical distributions. System identification Simulation
3 Credits (1-0-4)
Modeling and Optimization in Design Introduction to data science
Introduction to computer aided industrial design. The technique
and AI/ML for design research, Big Data Analytics Introduction to
of concurrent engineering. Using databases for material selection,
generative design.
Structure of CAD programs and hardware. Introduction to
surface modelling. Detailed study of surface modelling software. DDL725 Information Design & Data Visualization
Studio Exercises in Surface modelling applications. Drawing.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Surfacing. Modelling. Editing & Advanced Editing. Shading. Lighting.
Texturing. Backgrounds. Environments. Animation techniques and Pre-requisite(s): DDP731 or (DDL111, DDL116, DDL125, and
product Animation. DDL126)
172

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Design
Overlap: MSL814 DDL742 Universal Design
History of information design; Principles of organization of content & 3 Credits (2-0-2)
data; Principles of visual design for data displays; Narratives & data The universal design approach, need of universal design, inclusive
story-telling; Types of data; Types &tools of visual representation design, design for accessibility to all, principles of universal design,
of data; Preparation of data; Chronological representations; case studies of universal design, practicals in the domain of the
Geographical representations; Visualization of quantitative and universal design.
abstract data complexity.
DDL751 Form and Aesthetics
DDp731 Communication and presentation Skills
3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (1-0-4)
Elements of design, Nature inspired design, Gestalt, Product
Concept of sketching for designers, sketching through geometrical
semantics, Color theory and color trends, Varied approaches for form,
shapes, Sketching in isometric grids, sculpting conceptual objects
Product styling, case studies and design discourse on form, exercises
while sketching through cuboids. The use of shade and shadows,
on from development of a product (existing or conceptual).
Rendering, physical product modeling through frugal materials and
by the use of MDF, HIPS, Vacuum forming, modeling in FRP, product
DSL753 Design of Sustainable Habitats
photography, video recording for presentations.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
DDL732 Adv. Mat. processes & Die Design
Introduction to design of sustainable habitats, Land use planning,
3 Credits (2-0-2) GIS based analysis, Transit oriented development, Polycentric
Understanding properties and selection of natural and manmade cities, Providing urban amenities to rural areas (PURA), Mobility
materials including metals, plastics, ceramics, composites and interventions such as electric vehicles, Building science, thermal
natural materials. comfort, daylighting access, embodied and operational energy, passive
Understanding various manufacturing and prototyping methods solar architecture, climate responsive architecture, building simulation
including digital manufacturing / prototyping. models, green buildings, low energy cooling, Life between buildings
– outdoor thermal comfort, urban microclimate, urban heat island,
Hands on product realization exercises involving selection of materials
Health and wellness in the built environment, Energy demand and
and manufacturing processes.
supply, renewable energy, Analyzing air, water, waste, ICT networks,
Die and mould manufacturing methods including surface treatment Course project on sustainable habitat design.
and finishing processes.
Prototyping projects involving CNC, 3-D Printing, Vacuum forming, etc. DDR761 Social Immersion
1 Credit (0-0-2)
DDL732 Design for product Lifecycle
Documentation of societal issues through photography, recordings,
2 Credits (2-0-2)
sketches. Identification of locale of working, Identification of a
Product lifecycle, design for manufacture, Design for assembly and
potential societal issue. Presenting the societal issues as a report/
disassembly, design for reliability, design to cost, design for quality,
presentation/video.
design for sustainability.
DDR762 Vehicle Design
DDL732 Exhibition Design
3 Credits (2-0-2)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
History of transportation, technology trends in transportation and
futuristic predictions. Types of personal vehicles, mass transportation
DDL733 Healthcare Design
vehicles, their benefits and challenges in design. Trends and styling
3 Credits (2-0-2)
of two wheelers and four wheelers. Material and finish considerations
Pre-requisite(s): Prefer students to have taken Materials and in styling. Use of mood boards and cultural trends in transportation
Prototyping and Prototyping in IoT courses in Department of design. Vehicle design for rural India. Design projects and exercises.
Design or similar courses from other departments.
DDL768 Design Research Methodology
Introduction to medical device innovation and design thinking process.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Students shadow clinicians / health care providers to have first-hand
Introduction to design research; Quantitative research: paradigm,
feel of needs and affected patients.
characteristics, values of quantitative research; Methods: survey,
Primary and secondary research of needs. Brainstorming for idea
longitudinal studies, experimental research, questionnaires and so on;
generation. Prototyping basics. Healthcare system design. Data
Qualitative research: paradigm, characteristics, values of qualitative
science in health care. Clinical trials. Business model development.
research; Methods: contextual inquiry, ethnographic method,
Project based course. Promising projects can be continued for clinical
participant observation, indepth Interview, focus groups, journal/
trials and ventures.
document, visual research; Mixed-methods Research: participatory
research, action research; Heritage & material culture in India; Ethics
DDp741 product Interface & Design
of design research.
2 Credits (1-0-2)
A product as a living organism, its interface externally with the DDR772 Transportation Design
environment and internally with its components. 2. Interface for 3 Credits (2-0-2)
modulating user involvement. 3. Product Semantics, communication
Understanding different segments of design practice in transportation.
of feelings, 4. Communication of structure and purpose. 5.
Different role of designers in Automobile Industry. Design of human
Communication through form, color, graphics and text. 6. Typography
powered vehicles, Two wheelers design, Design of four wheelers,
choice and readability, Printing and Transfer Techniques. 7. Product
future of transportation, Styling, Professional practice: CAS and Clay.
graphics. 8. Functioning of controls and display elements, knobs,
push buttons, handles and electronic displays. 9. Investigation and
DDL782 Design for Usability
study of visual, functional and ergonomic requirements of controls
and displays, legibility of display elements. 10. Study of different 3 Credits (2-0-2)
textures, patterns and materials. 11. Area, volume and Proportion. History of increase in complexity and usability since WW-2. Story
12. Order and system. 13. Human factors and safety in interface of transition in human society form Man-Machine Interaction to
design. 14. Individually planned design projects involving research Human-Computer Interaction. Relationship between product
analysis and design of product interface. complexity and mental workload. Subjective and objective
173

Design Courses of Study 2024-2025
measurements of product complexity and mental workload. User Analysis of qualitative experiential data from users. Gender and
centered design process for usable product design. Introduction to cultural biases in experience measurements. Management of
concept of ‘mental models’ and exercises in understanding users’ psychological space in user experience testing setups. Development
mental models. Creation of Personas and scenarios. Conduct of task of user experience strategy, creation of user interfaces and testing
analysis. Operational definitions of usability. Measurement of ease of digital products from experiential perspective.
of use, efficiency and effectiveness of digital products. Design of
interactive products from usability perspective. Development of user DDL841 Design Management and professional practice
screeners, testing protocols and conduct of usability tests. Creation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
of paper prototypes, wireframes, information architecture. Conduct
Considerations in professional design startups including setting up
of low fidelity tests, card sorting, reverse card sorting, affordance
a design office, getting finances, finding clients, running the office,
tests, high fidelity testing and brand testing.
business correspondence, brief and briefing, feasibility reports, letters
of contract. Estimates of design fee as lump sum, hourly basis,
DDD792 Design project-I
consulting, commissioning and royalties. Study of Govt. regulations,
3 Credits (0-0-6) consumer protection acts, ISI standards, design registrations,
Aim of the project to help the student independently solve a design patents and copyrights. Professional ethics in design practice.
problem against an pre-identified design brief. Creativity theory. Integrated product development. Assessing risks
and opportunities. Cost cutting in design.
DDD799 Design project
4 Credits (1-0-6) DDR852 Strategic Design Management
Need Identification, Need Validation, Solution Identification, Design/ 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Solution Validation, Design Presentation. Branding and brand development, Repositioning in market, disruptive
innovation for market capitalization, Retail design, design of services,
DDR801 Summer Internship designing for new businesses.
2 Credits (0-0-4)
DDR862 Design in Indian Context
Identifying of the project area, setting the objectives, milieu and
deliverables of the Internship, report writing/Presentation. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to culture form product design perspective. Models and
DDL810 Special Topics in Design-I definitions of culture. Product design culture of India. Culture as an
3 Credits (3-0-0) aid in consumer product choice. Cross cultural biases in product
decisions. Cross cultural design teams. Considerations in designing
Special topics in design.
for a user from another culture. Exercises in product as a cultural
DDR812 Media Studies thought. Culture in evolutionary perspective and design of new
material cultures through products and lifestyles design.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
To enable designers to use different media optimally. Principles and
DDD891 Design project-II
processes of photography, videography, print and animation. Study
6 Credits (0-0-12)
of design constraints and affordances in differ media. Exercises in
photography, videography, print, animation Cinematography etc. The student will be able to practice the design process to solve a
Design of corporate identity programs. professionally challenging design problem. The student should exhibit
the sensitivity to the multidimensionality of the problems in the design
DDL820 Special Topics in Design-II domain. They should be able to prove their design outcome as viable
3 Credits (3-0-0) and practice solution for the given problem. The students are expected
to exhibit their work to the professional community.
Special topics in design.
DDV820 Special Modules in Design DDD892 Industry / Research Design project
1 Credit (1-0-0) 9 Credits (0-0-18)
To develop the ability to look at design problems from a research
DDR822 Design for Sustainability perspective. The student is expected to contribute to the professional
3 Credits (2-0-2) design field thorough new design knowledge generation. The project
is aimed to polish the designer’s research skills. The designer is
Concept of sustainability, Tipple bottom line, world vision for
expected to deliver cutting edge research and be able to articulate
sustainability, Emerging trends in the area of sustainability, Metrics
it professionally.
for measurement of sustainability, Product lifecycle management and
sustainability, Ecodesign.
DDL722 Design Entrepreneurship
DDD830 Self-initiated Design project 2 Credits (1-0-2)
3 Credits (0-0-6) Pre-requisite(s): 30 credits
Design process; Design research method; Conceptualization; Value addition by design, Design outcome as products, services,
Execution; Prototyping; Testing; Process documentation. systems and environments, Innovation & Entrepreneurship, Venture
Creation, Venture Financing, Go to Market Strategies, Business
DDR832 Design for User Experience Models, Pitching Methods.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Importance of user experience approach in design. Methods to DDL752 Design for Industry 4.0
understand users’ experiences. Modeling of user behaviors. Cognitive, 3 Credits (2-0-2)
affective and cultural perspectives in experiences. Consideration for
Pre-requisite(s): Materials and Prototyping, Prototyping in
human experiences in interaction design. Methods of direct, indirect,
IoT, Qualitative and Quantitative methods in design courses
subjective and objective measurements of human experiences. Issues
of reliability and validity in experience measurement. Qualitative from Department of Design or equivalent courses from other
interview techniques for gathering user motivations and emotions. departments.
174

Department of Electrical Engineering
ELL101 Introduction to Electrical Engineering principle, equivalent circuit, characteristics, phasor diagram and
4 Credits (3-1-0) applications.
Fractional-HP and Special Machines.
Elements in an Electrical circuit: R, L, C, Diode, Voltage and current
sources (independent and dependent/controlled sources). DC
ELp203 Electromechanics Laboratory
circuits, KCL, KVL, Network theorems, Mesh and nodal analysis.
Step response in RL, RC, RLC circuits. Phasor analysis of AC circuits. 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Single phase and 3-phase circuits. Two port network, BJT: CE and Pre-requisite(s): ELL101
small signal model, Operational amplifiers: Model and applications,
Introduction to Digital circuits. Magnetic circuits, Transformers: ELL205 Signals and Systems
Modeling and analysis, parameter determination. Energy in magnetic
4 Credits (3-1-0)
field. Electromechanical energy conversion principles with examples.
Principles of measurement of voltage, current and power. Motivation & orientation, Classifications of signals & systems, Dynamic
representation of LTI systems (discrete & continuous-time systems),
Fourier analysis of continuous-time signals & systems, Fourier analysis
ELp101 Introduction to Electrical Engineering
of discrete-time signals & systems, Nyquist sampling theorem, Laplace
(Laboratory)
transform, The z-transform, Introduction to probability, random
1 Credit (0-0-2) variables and stochastic processes.
CRO (mechanism and usage). KCL, KVL, Network theorem verification.
Step/transient response of RL, RC, RLC, circuits. Steady state ELL211 physical Electronics
response of Circuits of sinusoidal excitation. Diode experiment 3 Credits (3-0-0)
(clipping, clamping and rectification). Basic circuits using opamp.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 and PYL101
Transformers OC and SC tests. BH loop in an iron core, DC and AC
motor – for observation only. A small mini-project. Overlaps with: ELL732, ELL231, EPL336, EPL439 , PHL653,
PHL704, PHL705, PHL727, PHL793
ELL201 Digital Electronics Semiconductor materials , crystal structure, carriers in semiconductors,
4.5 Credits (3-0-3) band structure, density of states, excitons, doping and carrier
statistics, carrier transport, recombination and generation, p-n
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101
junction physics: built-in potential, forward and reverse bias,
Gates, binary number systems, arithmetic operations. Minimization capacitance, diode currents, breakdown, tunnel effects; metal-
using K-maps, reduced K-maps, tabular methods; design using semiconductor junctions; BJTs: current gain/Gummel plots, transistor
multiplexers, decoders, and ROMs. Latches, flip-flops, registers and models, breakdown;MOSFET physics: MOS capacitors, inversion,
counters. Asynchronous, synchronous counters. Finite state machines, depletion, accumulation, flatband, threshold voltage, long-channel
implementations thereof. Mealy, Moore machines. Clock period model, saturation, short-channel models, sub-threshold conduction,
computation. Memories. Partitioning and pipelining. VHDL/Verilog, SPICE models for MOSFETs; optoelectronic device physics, LEDs/
the register-transfer-level description style. Switch level introduction OLEDs, lasers, photodetectors, solar cells.
to logic families, CMOS logic, static, pre-charge and clocked logic.
Asynchronous circuits and design styles. ELL212 Electromagnetics
4 Credits (3-1-0)
ELL202 Circuit Theory
Pre-requisite(s): PYL101
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Review of Maxwell’s equations, wave propagations in unbounded
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 medium. Boundary conditions, reflection and refraction of plane
Overview of network analysis techniques, network theorems, waves. Evanescent waves and surface plasmons. Waveguides:
transient and steady-state sinusoidal response. Network graphs and parallel-plane guide, TE, TM and TEM waves, rectangular and
their applications in network analysis. Tellegen’s theorem, two-port cylindrical waveguides, resonators. Dielectric guides and optical
networks, Z, Y, h, g, and transmission matrices. Combining two ports fibres. Transmission Lines: distributed parameter circuits, traveling
in various configurations. Analysis of transmission lines to motivate and standing waves, impedance matching, Smith chart, analogy
the scattering matrix. Scattering matrix and its applications in network with plane waves. Planar transmission lines: stripline, micro stripline.
analysis. Network functions, positive real functions, and network Radiation: retarded potentials, Hertzian dipole, short loop, antenna
synthesis. Butterworth and Chebyshev approximations. Synthesis of parameters. Numerical techniques in electromagnetics.
lossless two-port networks. Synthesis of lattice all-pass filters.
ELp212 Electromagnetics Laboratory
ELL203 Electromechanics 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
4 Credits (3-1-0) Pre-requisite(s): ELL212
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101
ELL225 Control Engineering
Review: AC Circuits, Complex representation and Power Measurement.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Magnetic Circuits: Simple magnetic circuit, analogy between magnetic
circuits and electrical circuits, linear and nonlinear magnetic circuits, Pre-requisite(s): ELL205
hysteresis and eddy current losses, permanent magnet materials.
Overlaps with: MCL212, CLL261
Transformers: Single-phase and three-phase, analysis, equivalent
Introduction to the control problem, Control System Components:
circuit, Tests on transformers, phasor diagram regulation and
Sensors, Actuators, Computational blocks. Mathematical representation
efficiency, auto-transformer and instrument transformers (PT/CT).
of systems, state variable model, linearization, transfer function
Electro-mechanical energy conversion principles: Force and EMF
model. Transfer function and state variable models of suitable
production in a rotating machine.
mechanical, electrical, thermal and pneumatic systems. Closed loop
DC machines: Types, construction, working principle, characteristics systems, Block diagram and signal flow analysis, Basic Characteristics
and applications. of feedback control systems: stability, steady-state accuracy, transient
3-phase induction machines: Types, construction, Introduction to accuracy, disturbance rejection, sensitivity analysis and robustness.
windings and winding factor, production of revolving magnetic field, Basic modes of feedback control: Proportional, Integral, Derivative.
working principle on 3-phase induction machine, equivalent circuit, Concept of stability, Stability criteria: Routh stability criterion,
characteristics, phasor diagram and applications. Mikhailov’s criterion, Kharitonov theorem. Time response of 2nd order
3-phase synchronous machines: Types, construction, working system, steady state error analysis. Performance specifications in the
175

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
time domain. Root locus method of design. Nyquist stability criterion. and transmission line for power system analysis. per unit system.
Frequency response analysis: Nyquist plots, Bode plots, Nichols Power flow analysis. Fault analysis in power systems. Power system
Charts, Performance specifications in frequency domain, Frequency stability studies. Transients in power system and travelling waves.
domain methods of design. Lead lag compensation. Introduction to power system relaying and brief idea of over current,
differentia and impedance based protection. Basic concepts of Power
ELp225 Control Engineering Laboratory system operation and control. Introduction to HVDC and FACTS.
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
ELp303 power Engineering Laboratory
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Basics of Sensors and Actuators, Study of AC and DC Motors, Linear
Systems, Analog and Digital Motors, Synchros, Temperature Control. Pre-requisite(s): ELP303
Experiments will be conducted on 3-phase alternators and
ELL231 power Electronics and Energy Devices transformers for measuring their sequence impedance. Directional,
3 Credits (3-0-0) overcurrent and differential protection relays will be studied. Computer
simulation for power flow, short circuit and stability studies of
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 interconnected power systems. Numerical relays and synchrophasors
Introduction to semiconductor basics and PN Junctions. Short will be introduced. FACTS devices will be experimented.
introduction to power device technology, PIN diodes, Schottky diodes,
Power BJTs, Power MOSFETs, IGBTs, Thyristors, Wide bandgap power ELL304 Analog Electronics
semiconductor devices, Packaging and Reliability of Power devices, 5.5 Credits (3-1-3)
Destructive mechanisms in power devices, Power device induced
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 and ELL202 and (ELL211 or ELL231)
oscillations and Electromagnetic disturbances, Selection of power
Review of working of BJT and MOSFET, large signal and small signal
devices in power electronic systems, Smart power integrated circuits.
models, biasing schemes, analysis and design of various single
ELL301 Electrical and Electronics Instrumentation stage amplifier configuration, low and high frequency analysis of
3 Credits (3-0-0) single stage amplifiers, frequency compensation, current mirrors,
multistage amplifiers; differential and operational amplifiers, negative
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 and positive feedback, oscillators and power amplifiers.
Basics of Measurement and Instrumentation, Instrument Examples:
Galvanometer, Accelerometer etc; calibration methods, Voltage ELL305 Computer Architecture
and Current Measurements; Theory, calibration, application, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Errors and compensation. Power and Energy Measurement and its
Pre-requisite(s): ELL201
errors, Methods of correction, LPF wattmeter, Phantom loading,
Induction type KWH meter; Calibration of wattmeter, energy meter. Overlaps with: CSL211
Potentiometer and Instrument Transformer :DC and AC potentiometer, Introduction: Performance measurement, Instruction Set Architecture,
C.T. and V.T. construction, theory, operation, characteristics. Digital Computer Arithmetic, Processor: ALU design, Control design,
Instrumentation. Pipelining, Memory Hierarchy, I/O management, Multicores,
Multiprocessors, Clusters, GPU.
ELL302 power Electronics
ELp305 Design and System Laboratory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL231 (EE3) / ELL211 (EE1)
Introduction to Power Electronics devices and protection: Thyristor ELS310 Independent Study (EE1)
family devices, principle of operation, IGBT operation, principles and
3 Credits (0-3-0)
ratings. Snubber designs, selection and protection, Firing circuits.
AC-DC converters: uncontrolled, semi-controlled, fully controlled ELL311 Communication Engineering
and dual converters in single-phase and three-phase configurations,
4 Credits (3-1-0)
design, phase control, harmonic analysis, firing circuits and their
designs. Improved power quality AC-DC converters. Pre-requisite(s): ELL205
Choppers: Introduction to dc-dc conversion, various topologies, Review of Fourier Series and Transforms. Hilbert Transforms,
buck, boost, buck-boost converters, High frequency isolated dc-dc BandpassSignal and System Representation. Random Processes,
converters: design problems, PWM control and operation. Stationarity, Power Spectral Density, Gaussian Process, Noise. Amplitude
Inverters: Basics of dc to ac conversion, inverter circuit configurations Modulation, DSBSC, SSB, VSB: Signal Representation, Generation
and principle of operation, VSI and CSI, single and three-phase and Demodulation. Frequency Modulation: Signal Representation,
configurations, Square wave and sinusoidal PWM control methods Generation and Demodulation. Mixing, Superheterodyne Receiver,
and harmonic control. Design problems. Phase Recovery with PLLs. Noise: in AM Receivers using Coherent
Detection, in AM Receivers using Envelope Detection, in FM Receivers.
AC voltage controllers: Introduction to ac to ac conversion, single-
Sampling, Pulse-Amplitude Modulation. Quantization, Pulse-Code
phase and three-phase ac voltage controller circuit configurations,
Modulation. Noise considerations in PCM, Time Division Multiplexing,
applications, advantages, harmonic analysis, control, design problems.
Delta Modulation. Intersymbol Interference, Introduction to
Cyclo-converters: single-phase to single-phase, three-phase to single-
Information Theory: concepts of Entropy and Source-Coding
phase, three-phase to three-phase and single-phase to three-phase
circuit configurations thyristors and triacs. ELp311 Communication Engineering Laboratory
ELp302 power Electronics Laboratory 1 Credit (0-0-2)
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Pre-requisite(s): ELL311
Laboratory experiments on analog, pulse, and basic digital modulation
Pre-requisite(s): ELL302
and demodulation techniques.
ELL303 power Engineering-I ELL312 Semiconductor process Technology
4 Credits (3-1-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101, ELL203 Pre-requisite(s): ELL211
Introduction to the basic structure of power system along with various Semiconductor materials (inorganic and organic), history of
power generation technologies. Modeling of generators, transformers semiconductor IC devices, crystal structure, defects, vacancies and
176

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
interstitials, semiconductor crystal growth, bulk doping methods, ELL332 Electric Drives
purification methods, wafer manufacture, diffusion, surface doping, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
oxidation, dopant redistribution, ion implantation and annealing, rapid
thermal processes, photolithography, masks, photoresists, exposure, Pre-requisite(s): ELL203
e-beam lithography, vacuum systems, gas flow, plasma processes, Basic Concepts: Characteristics and operating modes of drive motors.
pumping theory, leaks, vacuum gauges, wet etching, plasma etching, Starting, braking and speed control of motors. 4 quadrant drives. Types
process gas chemistry and polymerization, ion milling, reactive ion of loads. Torque and associated controls used in process industries.
etching, lift-off, vapor pressure of materials, evaporation, sputtering, DC Motor Drives: Characteristics, Starting Methods, Braking Methods,
deposition rate and step coverage, codepositions, film growth Speed Control Using Converters and Choppers.
mechanisms and stress, chemical vapor deposition, metal-organic Three phase Induction Motor Drives: Characteristics and Equivalent
chemical vapor deposition, atomic layer deposition, molecular beam Circuits, Starting Methods, Braking Methods, Speed Control of Cage
epitaxy, planarization processes, interconnects, yield and device Rotor Induction Machines using as AC voltage controllers, Voltage-
integration. Source and Current-Source Inverters. V-by-F Control and other Control
Techniques. Speed Control of Wound-Rotor Induction Machines using
ELL313 Antennas and propagation Rotor Resistance Variation; Slip-Power Recovery Scheme.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Three phase Synchronous Motor Drives: Characteristics and Equivalent
Prerequisites: ELL212 Circuits, Starting Methods, Braking Methods, Speed Control in True
Synchronous and Self Control Modes.
Starting from the principle of radiation different types of antenna;
Special Machines: Permanent Magnet Brush-Less Motor Drives,
wire, slot, planar and their arrays with feeds. Antenna synthesis and
Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motor Drives, Stepper and
design and measurements. Characteristics of propagation of radio
Reluctance Motor Drives.
waves in different atmospheric layers and study of the losses, fading
and scattering of microwave and millimeter waves in the atmosphere.
ELp332 Electric Drives Laboratory
ELL315 Introduction to Analog Integrated Circuits 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): ELL332
Pre-requisite(s): ELL204, ELL202
ELL333 Multivariable Control
Review of basic amplifiers. Current Mirrors, Reference Current and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Voltage Sources. CMOS Operational Amplifier: Structure, Analysis
and Design, Frequency Response and Compensation Techniques. Pre-requisite(s): ELL225
Switched Capacitor Circuits: Principles of operation, Filter and non
Overlaps with: ELL721
filter applications. Sample and Hold Circuits, Comparators. ADC:
Review of control system fundamentals and basic linear algebra.
Characterization, Types of ADC and their relative merits and demerits,
Introduction to linear dynamical systems and properties. State-space
Design issues. DAC: Characterization, Types of DAC and their relative
representation and canonical realizations. Relation between state-
merits and demerits, Design issues.
space and transfer function representations. Similarity transformation.
Diagonalization. Jordan canonical form. Matrix exponential and its
ELL316 Introduction to VLSI Design
properties. Solution of state equations. Cayley-Hamilton Theorem,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Stability: BIBO and internal. Linearization of nonlinear systems.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL211 Controllability and Observability. Minimal realization. State feedback
Basic MOS characteristics; Deep sub-micron; velocity saturation; and observer design. Linear Quadratic Regulator.
Dynamic MOS characteristics; parasitics; leakage; sizing; propagation
ELL334 DSp Based Control of Drives
delay; Logical effort, path delay, optimization; Ratio-ed logic, Pass
transistor logic and parasitics; Dynamic logic, pulsed sequential 4 Credits (3-0-2)
logic; Logical synthesis, physical design, layout; Introduction to Pre-requisite(s): ELL203, ELL332
design of VLSI memories.
Introduction and Application of DSP in the power electronic converter
controlled drives, Types of processors used for power control and their
ELL318 Digital Hardware Design
comparison, computational advantages, Limitations. Introduction to
3 Credits (3-0-0) peripherals ADC, DAC, PWM, Encoders and their interface. Interfacing
Pre-requisite(s): ELL305 issues, Sampling process, Harmonic analysis in real-time using
a DSP, Assembly language programming of a DSP, Motor control
Overlaps with: CSL316
applications. Pulse-Width Modulation and Pulse-Frequency Modulation
Technology basics and digital logic families such as static CMOS, pass schemes, lookup tables and real-time computation. Interfacing and
transistor, transmission gate, dynamic and domino logic. Advanced signal conditioning circuits for DSP based schemes. Realization of
sequential logic elements with latch-based design and timing and computationally intensive algorithms like variable structure, adaptive
clocking concepts. Design flows and paradigms. Data path, control and neural network schemes for Drives systems.
and advanced pipeline implementations. Advanced digital arithmetic.
Performance evaluation. ELL335 CAD of Electric Machines
4 Credits (3-0-2)
ELL319 Digital Signal processing
Pre-requisite(s): ELL103
4 Credits (3-0-2)
1. Basic Considerations, 2. Design of Main Dimensions, 3. Transformer
Pre-requisite(s): ELL205 Design, 4. Design of rotating machines, 5. Computer Aided Design of
Overlaps with: ELL720 Transformers, 6. Computer Aided Design of DC machines, 7. Computer
Aided Design of Synchronous Machines, 8. Computer Aided Design of
Review of Signals and Systems, Sampling and data reconstruction
Induction Machines, 9. Computer Aided Design of Special Machines.
processes. Z transforms. Discrete linear systems. Frequency domain
design of digital filters. Quantization effects in digital filters. Discrete ELL363 power Engineering-II
Fourier transform and FFT algorithms. High speed convolution and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
its application to digital filtering.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL303
ELS330 Independent Study (EE3)
Advanced concepts in power flow analysis, security analysis and state
3 Credits (0-3-0) estimation. Economic load dispatch and unit commitment problem.
177

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Voltage and frequency control in power systems. Advanced concepts Pre-requisite(s): ELL305
in multi-machine dynamics and stability. Electrical transients in
Overlaps with: COL331, MTL458, ELL783
power systems. Wind and solar generation technologies and their
Introduction to OS; Process and Thread management; Scheduling;
integration into the grid. Issues in restructured power systems.
Concurrent threads and processes: mutual exclusion, synchronization,
Modern numerical protection.
inter-process communication; Memory management: Cache and
ELL365 Embedded Systems Virtual Memory management; Resource management: deadlock and
3 Credits (3-0-0) its prevention; File management; I/O management; Introduction to
real time systems; Elements distributed operating systems.
Overview of Embedded Systems; Embedded System Architecture:
processor example ARM, PIC, etc.; features of digital signal
ELL406 Robotics and Automation
processor; SOC, memory sub system, busstructure (PC 104, I2C, SPI
etc.), interfacing protocols (USB, IrDA etc), testing and debugging, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
power management; Embedded System Software: Program Pre-requisite(s): ELL225
Optimization,Concurrent Programming, Real time Scheduling and I/O
Introduction to robotics. Basic components of robotic systems.
management; Networked Embedded Systems: special networking
Coordinate Transformation, D-H parameters. Forward and inverse
protocols (CAN, Bluetooth); Applications.
kinematics. Velocity kinematics and Jacobian, Singularity analysis,
ELL400 power Systems protection Robot Dynamics : Holonomic and Non-Holonomic Systems. Trajectory
planning. Robot control: linear and nonlinear. Actuators and Sensors.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Vision based Robotic Control. Mobile Robots : Modeling and Control.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL303
Fundamentals of Power system protection, philosophy of protective ELL408 Low power circuit design
relays, Different types of relays, Introduction to protection elements 3 Credits (3-0-0)
like CT, PT, CB, Isolator etc, (includes CT and PT class, CB transients,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL211
CB rating and testing, Arc extinction in CB), Over current relays:
Principle, operation and setting, Directional relays : needs and MOS Transistors, MOS Inverters, Static CMOS Circuits, MOS Dynamic
operating principle, Power system components protected using over Circuits, Pass Transistor Logic Circuits, MOS Memories, Finite State
current relays, Differential relays: Principle, operation and setting, Machines, Switching Power Dissipation, Dynamic Power Dissipation,
Protection of three phase transformer, bus bar and generator Leakage Power Dissipation, Supply Voltage Scaling, Minimizing
using differential relays, Distance relays : Principle, operation and Switched Capacitance Minimizing Leakage Power, Variation Tolerant
setting, Simple impedance relay, reactance relay, Mho relay and Design, Battery-Driven System Design.
angle impedance relays, Quadrilateral relays, Transmission line
protection using distance relays, Static relays: principle, amplitude ELL409 Machine Intelligence and Learning
comparator and phase comparator, Phase comparator realization 4 Credits (3-0-2)
using positive coincidence period, Distance relay realization using
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106, COL106
comparators, Generator protection, Overview of Numerical relaying
and few algorithms, Phasor extraction, Introduction to PMU and its Overlaps with: ELL784, ELL789, COL341/COL774
use, Fault location. Introduction to machine intelligence and intelligent agents; problem
solving; knowledge representation and reasoning (logical and
ELL401 Advanced Electromechanics
probabilistic); need for learning; basics of machine learning; Decision
3 Credits (3-0-0) Trees; Rule-based models; linear learning models; Support Vector
Pre-requisite(s): ELL203 Machines; Artificial Neural Networks; Deep Learning; Probabilistic
Modelling; Naive Bayes; Reinforcement Learning; Clustering;
Introduction to Advancement in Electromechanics, Permanent Magnet
Feature Selection; Principal Component Analysis; Combining
Brushless DC Machines, Permanent Magnet Synchronous Motors,
models; Philosophical issues in intelligence and learning. Substantive
Switched Reluctance Motors, Single-Phase Machines, Axial Field
implementation assignments or a term project involving design of an
Machines and other Advanced Electrical Machines, Introduction to
intelligent learning-based system.
Control of Advanced Electrical Machines, Applications in Industry,
Domestic Appliances, Electric Mobility, etc., Computer Aided
ELL410 Multicore Systems
Simulation and Design of Advanced Electrical Machines, Case Studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL402 Computer Communication
Motivation for muticores; Multithreading; Flynn’s taxonomy; Stream
3 Credits (3-0-0) processing (vectVLIW, GPU). Message passing; Shared memory;
Cache coherence in multiprocessor Synchronisation; Interconnection
Pre-requisite(s): MEL250
networks; Benchmarks and advanced topics; Project.
Overlaps with: ELL785, COL334
(i) Introduction, network structure: Basic networking concepts, ELD411 B.Tech. project-I
Motivations for layered network concepts, Network examples; (ii)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
OSI reference model: Layering concepts, Overview of different layer
functionalities; (iii) TCP/IP: Layering concepts, Layered functionalities,
ELL411 Digital Communications
packet formats, fragmentation, Different layer protocols and
examples: ARP, ICMP, etc., Congestion and error control; (iv) Network 4 Credits (3-0-2)
examples and functionalities: Ethernet, hub, bridge, switch, WANs,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL311
MANs, LANs, PANs, BANs; (v) Basic network protocol analysis:
Performance metrics, Queueing models; (vi) Multiaccess protocols: Overlaps with: ELL712
Need for multiaccess protocols, Contention-free access schemes, Matched Filter, Error Rate due to Noise. Intersymbol Interference,
Contention-based protocols: ALOHA, CSMA; (vii) Routing in data Nyquist’s Criterion, Duobinary Signaling. Optimum Linear Receiver,
networks: Basic graph theoretic concepts, spanning tree, Shortest Geometric Representation of Signals. Coherent Detection of Signals
path routing, distance vector routing, link state routing, RIP, OSPF; in Noise, Probability of Error. Coherent Digital Modulation Schemes:
(viii) Cross-layer protocol optimization concepts: Distributed control, MPSK, MFSK, MQAM; Error Analysis. Noncoherent FSK, Differential
cost and energy efficiencies. PSK. Comparison of Digital Modulation Schemes, Bandwidth Efficiency.
Pseudo-Noise Sequences and Spread Spectrum, Trellis coded
ELL405 Operating Systems modulation, Digital signaling over fading multipath channels, OFDM
3 Credits (3-0-0) communications systems.
178

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
ELp411 Digital Communications Laboratory impedance relays, Quadrilateral relays, Transmission line protection
1 Credit (0-0-2) using distance relays. Static relays: principle, amplitude comparator
and phase comparator, Phase comparator realization using positive
Pre-requisite(s): ELP311 coincidence period, Distance relay realization using comparators.
Generator protection. Overview of Numerical relaying and few
ELL417 Renewable Energy Systems algorithms, Phasor extraction, Introduction to PMU and its use,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Fault location.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL203
ELD450 BTp part-II
Modeling of wind resource, aerodynamic characteristics, wind energy
8 Credits (0-0-16)
generators – steady-state and dynamic modeling, electrical and pitch
controller design, effect of induction generators on grid operation,
solar Photovoltaic systems – steady state and dynamic modeling, ELL450 Selected Topics in AE–I
MPPT operation, power electronic systems for solar PV, fuel cells. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELD431 B.Tech. project-I ELD451 BTp part-II
3 Credits (0-0-6) 8 Credits (0-0-16)
ELL431 power System Optimization ELV451 Special Modules in SG&RE–I
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL303 Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
Characteristic of Generation units, Economic dispatch of thermal
plants, Unit commitment, Hydrothermal coordination, Maintenance ELD452 BTp part-II
scheduling, Emission minimization, Optimal Power flow, Security 8 Credits (0-0-16)
constrained optimization, Optimization of distribution networks,
Optimization in Power Markets. ELL452 Special Topics in EET-I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL433 CAD of power Electronics Systems
4 Credits (3-0-2) ELD453 BTp part-II
Pre-requisite(s): ELP302 8 Credits (0-0-16)
Introduction to Power Electronic systems, Mathematical modeling
of power electronic systems, State-space modeling, Average model, ELL453 power System Dynamics and Control
Circuit averaging model, Canonical circuit model, small-signal models 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and circuit transfer functions. Introduction to power electronics
Characteristic of Generation units, Economic dispatch of thermal
simulators, system oriented simulators, circuit simulators, merits
plants, Unit commitment, Hydrothermal coordination, Maintenance
and limitations. Introduction to magnetic design, high frequency
scheduling, Emission minimization, Optimal Power flow, Security
inductor and transformer design. Hands-on exercise problems
constrained optimization, Optimization of distribution networks,
on power electronic circuits simulation using PSPICE/ SIMULINK/
Optimization in Power Markets.
PSIM simulators.
ELD454 BTp part-II
ELL436 Digital control
8 Credits (0-0-16)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225 ELL454 Special Topics in ET–I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL437 Switched Mode power Conversion
ELD455 BTp part-II
3 Credits (3-0-0)
8 Credits (0-0-16)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL231
To give an introduction about the power switching devices such as
ELL455 Special Topics in V&ES–I
thyristors, GTO, MOSFETS, BJT, IGBT and MCTS. Basic concept of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
gate drivers (Trigger techniques, optical isolators, protection circuits,
and isolation transformers), snubber design and protection schemes Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by instructor
of power devices are to be discussed. Basic circuit configurations,
design and analysis of choppers (step-up, step-down, step-up/down ELD456 BTp part-II
and multi-phase choppers), DC-DC converters (non-isolated and
8 Credits (0-0-16)
isolated), inverters (voltage and current source configurations) are
discussed. This is followed by improved power quality converters
ELL456 Special Topics in NE&pS–I
(non-isolated and isolated) for reduction of harmonics at AC mains.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL440 power Systems protection Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
Fundamentals of Power system protection, philosophy of protective
relays, Different types of relays, Introduction to protection elements ELD457 BTp part II
like CT, PT, CB, Isolator etc, (includes CT and PT class, CB transients,
8 Credits (0-0-16)
CB rating and testing, Arc extinction in CB). Over current relays:
Principle, operation and setting, Directional relays: needs and
ELL457 Special Topics in C&IS–I
operating principle, Power system components protected using over
3 Credits (3-0-0)
current relays. Differential relays: Principle, operation and setting,
Protection of three phase transformer, bus bar and generator using
ELD458 BTp part-II
differential relays. Distance relays: Principle, operation and setting,
Simple impedance relay, reactance relay, Mho relay and angle 8 Credits (0-0-16)
179

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
ELL458 Special Topics in CS&N–I and Matrix norms, Matrix factorization, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
3 Credits (3-0-0) and Applications, Singular Value Decomposition and its Applications,
Projections, Least Square Solutions. Probability, Random Variables,
ELD459 BTp part-II Probability distribution and density functions, Joint density and
Conditional distribution, Functions of random variables, Moments,
8 Credits (0-0-16)
characteristic functions, sequence of random variables, Correlation
Pre-requisite(s): ELD411, ELD431 matrices and their properties, Random processes and their properties,
Response of Linear systems to stochastic inputs, PSD theorem.
ELL459 Special Topics in Ip–I
ELL702 Nonlinear Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225 or equivalent
ELL460 Special Topics in Ip–II Introduction to nonlinear systems: Examples of phenomena, models
3 Credits (3-0-0) & derivation of system equations. Fundamental properties: Existence
& uniqueness, Dependence on initial conditions & parameters.
Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
Phase plane analysis. Limit cycles & oscillations. Describing function
ELL625 Control Engineering (Bridge Course) method and applications. Circle criterion. Lyapunov stability of
autonomous systems. Perturbation theory & Averaging. Singular
3 Credits (3-0-0)
perturbation model and stability analysis. Basic results on Lie algebra.
Overlaps with: ELL225 Controllability and Observability of nonlinear systems. Bifurcations.
Course Contents: Introduction to the control problem, Control System Chaos. Synchronization.
Components: Sensors, Actuators, Computational blocks. Mathematical
ELL703 Optimal Control Theory
representation of systems, state variable model, linearization, transfer
function model. Transfer function and state variable models of suitable 3 Credits (3-0-0)
mechanical, electrical, thermal and pneumatic systems. Closed loop Pre-requisite(s): ELL700 or ELL333
systems, Block diagram and signal flow analysis, Basic Characteristics
Maximization of functionals of a single and several functions using
of feedback control systems: stability, steady-state accuracy, transient
calculus of variations, Constrained extremals, Euler-Lagrange Equation,
accuracy, disturbance rejection, sensitivity analysis and robustness.
Necessary conditions for optimal control, Pontryagin’s minimum
Basic modes of feedback control: Proportional, Integral, Derivative.
principle and state inequality constraints, Minimum time problems,
Concept of stability, Stability criteria: Routh stability criterion,
Minimum control effort problems, Linear quadratic regulator problems,
Mikhailov's criterion, Kharitonov theorem. Time response of 2nd order
Riccati Equation, Singular intervals in optimal control problems, The
system, steady state error analysis. Performance specifications in the
principle of optimality, Application of the principle of optimality to
time domain. Root locus method of design. Nyquist stability criterion.
decision making, Dynamic programming applied to routing problems,
Frequency response analysis:Nyquist plots, Bode plots, Nichols Charts,
Solving optimal control problems using dynamic programming,
Performance specifications in frequency domain, Frequency domain
Discrete linear regulator problem, Hamilton -Jacobi -Bellman
methods of design. Lead lag compensation.
Equation, Numerical Techniques to determine optimal trajectories.
ELL633 Multivariable Control (Bridge Course) ELL704 Advanced Robotics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: ELL333 (100%) Pre-requisite(s): ELL225
Course Contents: Review of control system fundamentals and Review of Coordinate Transformations, D-H parameters and
basic linear algebra. Introduction to linear dynamical systems and kinematics. Velocity kinematics and Jacobian, Singularity analysis,
properties. State-space representation and canonical realisations. Robot Dynamics. Motion planning, Robot control: linear methods –
Relation between state-space and transfer function rcprcsen1ations. feedforward control, state feedback, observers; Nonlinear Control
Similarity transformation. Diagonalization. Jordan canonical form. methods – Computed Torque Control, Feedback linearization,
Matrix exponential and its properties. Solution of state equations. Sliding Mode control; Vision based Robotic Control. Holonomic and
Cayley-Hamilton Theorem, Stability: Bl80 and internal. Linearization Non-Holonomic Systems, Mobile Robots : Modeling and Control,
of nonlinear systems. Controllability and Observability. Minimal Odometry Analysis, Navigation problems with obstacle avoidance,
realisation. State feedback and observer design. Linear Quadratic motion capturing systems.
Regulator.
ELL705 Stochastic Filtering and Identification
ELL700 Linear Systems Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL701 or ELL333
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225 or equivalent MMSE estimation including LMS, Gaussian case. Wiener filtering &
Review of matrix algebra, state variable modelling of continuous and prediction. Kalman filtering & prediction. Extended Kalman filtering.
discrete time systems, linearization of state equations, solution of Predictors for difference equation based models including ARMA, Box
state equations of linear time-invariant and time varying systems, Jenkins & others. Statistical properties of Least Squares estimation
Controllability and observability of dynamical systems, Minimal and its relationship with Bayes estimation (ML, MAP), convergence
realization of linear systems and canonical forms, Liapunov’s stability analysis, CR bound. Recursive Least Squares, Iterative methods for
theory for linear dynamical systems, State Feedback controllers, nonlinear Least Squares. Identification problem: Different approaches
Observer and Controller design. for linear dynamical systems. Offline identification methods including
Least Squares, Prediction error framework, Pseudo-linear regression
ELV700 Special Module in Systems and Control (PLR) & Instrument variable methods. Recursive Identification of
1 Credit (1-0-0) linear dynamical system: RLS, PLR, Prediction error framework &
its application to ARMA & Innovations representation. Convergence
Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
Analysis of Recursive Identification methods: Associated ODE,
To provide exposure in specialized topics in systems and control.
Martingale. Nonlinear system identification. Subspace based method of
system identification. Applications including LQG and adaptive control.
ELL701 Mathematical Methods in Control
3 Credits (3-0-0) ELL706 Optmization for Electrical Engineers
Linear Spaces – Vectors and Matrices, Transformations, Norms - Vector 3 Credits (3-0-0)
180

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
Convex analysis, Special convex optimization problems, convex negative binomial, etc.) and their properties like PDF, CDF, MGF.
optimization theory, Linear programming, unconstrained convex Continuous random variables: Gaussian, multivariate Gaussian;
programming, Non-smooth convex optimization, contrained convex whitening of the Gaussian random vector; complex Gaussian
optimization, Structural optimization, online convex optimization, random vector, circularity; Rayleigh and Rician; exponential; chi-
stochastic gradient descent, non-convex optimization. squared; gamma.
Signal spaces: convergence and continuity; linear spaces, inner
ELL707 Systems Biology
product spaces; basis, Gram-Scmidt orthogonalization.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Stochastic convergence, law of large numbers, central limit theorem.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225 Random processes: stationarity; mean, correlation, and covariance
MODELS: Variables and parameters, Law of mass action, functions, WSS random process; autocorrelation and cross-correlation
Representations : Deterministic vs stochastic, Spatial aspects, functions; transmission of a random process through a linear filter;
Examples of core processes: Gene expression, Protein degradation, power spectral density; white random process; Gaussian process;
Phosphorylation. Poisson process.
DYNAMICS: Equilibrium solutions, Bifurcations, Switches, Bistability,
Pulses and Oscillations, Circadian Rhythms and Clocks, Spatial ELL712 Digital Communications
patterns. Morphogenesis and Development. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
CONTROL MECHANISMS: Performance Goals, Integral Feedback Review of random variables and random process, signal space
Control, Homeostasis and Perfect Adaptation, Bacterial Chemotaxis, concepts, Common modulated signals and their power spectral
Feedforward Loops, Fold Change Detection, Robustness to densities, Optimum receivers for Gaussian channels, Coherent and
Perturbations, Tradeoffs, Internal Model Principle. non-cohrerent receivers and their performance (evaluating BER
performance through software tools), Basics of Information theory,
ELL708 Selected Topics in Systems and Control source and channel coding, capacity of channels, band-limited
3 Credits (3-0-0) channels and ISI, multicarrier and spread-spectrum signaling, multiple
access techniques.
Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
To be decided by the Instructor when floating this course: It can be ELL713 Microwave Theory and Techniques
anything that is related to systems and control engineering, but is
3 Credits (3-0-0)
not covered in any of the established courses.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL212
ELL709 Online prediction, Optimization, and Learning
Overlaps with: CRL711
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of EM theory: Maxwell’s equations, plane waves in dielectric
Pre-requisite(s): (MTL106 or ELL711) and ELL706 and conducting media, energy and power. Transmission lines and
Online prediction: Majority and weighted majority algorithms, waveguides: closed and dielectric guides, planar transmission lines and
mistake bound; learning with expert advice-exponential weighted optical fibre. Network analysis: scattering matrix other parameters,
average forecaster, convex loss; non-convex loss, randomization; signal flow graphs and network representation. Impedance matching
regret bounds; applications to electrical engineering. and tuning. Analysis of planar transmission lines. Analysis of design
of passive components.
Online convex optimization (OCO): Follow the leader (FTL),
regularised FTL (FTRL), Online gradient descent (OGD), stochastic
ELL714 Basic Information Theory
gradient descent (SGD), online mirror descent (OMD), regret bounds;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
applications to electrical engineering.
Multi-armed bandit (MAB): Stochastic MAB, UCB algorithm, Pre-requisite(s): ELL205
asymptotic and minimax optimality, KL-UCB algorithm; Adversarial Introduction to entropy, relative entropy, mutual information,
bandits, Exp3 and Exp3-IX algorithms; Contextual and linear bandits; fundamental inequalities like Jensen’s inequality and log sum
regret analysis; lower bounds; best arm identification with high inequality. Proof of asymptotic equipartition property and its usage
probability; Bayesian bandit- Thompson sampling, Gittin’s index; in data compression. Study of entropy rates of the stochastic process
Restless bandits, Whittle’s index; combinatorial and nonstationary following Markov chains. Study of data compression: Kraft inequality
bandits; ranking; applications to electrical engineering. and optimal source coding. Channel capacity: symmetric channels,
channel coding theorem, Fano’s inequality, feedback capacity.
ELL710 Coding Theory
Differential entropy. The Gaussian channel: bandlimited channels,
3 Credits (3-0-0) channels with colored noise, Gaussian channels with feedback.
Measure of information, Source coding, Communication channel Detailed study of the rate-distortion theory: rate distortion function,
models, Channel Capacity and coding, Linear Block codes, Low Density strongly typical sequences, computation of channel capacity. Joint
Parity Check (LDPC) Codes, Bounds on minimum distance, Cyclic source channel coding/separation theorem. There are no laboratory
codes, BCH codes, Reed Solomon Codes, Convolutional codes, Trellis or design activities involved with this course.
coded Modulation, Viterbi decoding, Turbo codes, Introduction to
ELL715 Digital Image processing
Space-Time Codes and Introduction to Cryptography. If time permits,
LDPC/Turbo codes in the wireless standards. There are no laboratory 4 Credits (3-0-2)
or design activities involved with this course. Introduction to 2-D Signals and Systems. Image Digitization. Image
Transforms. Image Enhancement: Image Restoration: Inverse
ELV710 Special Module in Cyber Security
Filtering, Algebraic Approach to Restoration, Wiener (LMS) approach,
1 Credit (1-0-0) Constrained Least Squares Restoration, Adaptive methods for
Overview of cyber security, computer security and the associated restoration. Image Reconstruction: The Filtered Back- Projection
threat, attack, adversary models, access control, intrusion detection, Algorithm, Algebraic Reconstruction Method. Image Segmentation:
basic network security, security of cyber physical systems and a brief Detection of Discontinuities, Edge Linking and Boundary Detection,
introduction to cryptography. Thresholding, Region-Oriented Segmentation. Object representation
and description: Boundary descriptors, region descriptors, HOG and
ELL711 Signal Theory SIFT based features. Colour Image processing: colour models, colour
transformations, and processing techniques.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL205, ELL311 ELL716 Telecommunication Switching and Transmission
Discrete random variables (Bernoulli, binomial, Poisson, geometric, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
181

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Wireline access circuits, long haul circuits, signaling, switching Introduction to Multirate signal processing, Multirate filtering
exchanges, analysis of telecom switching networks, teletraffic and Filterbanks: including Polyphase decomposition and perfect
engineering, management protocols, multi-service telecom protocols reconstruction, Cyclostationarity and LPTV filters, Introduction to
and networks. Wavelet Transform.
The self-study component will consist of design problems in the above
ELL717 Optical Communication Systems
to be implemented on MATLAB.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELp720 Telecommunication Networks Laboratory
The fiber channel with its linear and nonlinear characteristics, LED
and Laser diode transmitter design, PIN and APD receiver design, 3 Credits (0-1-4)
Modulation schemes, Source and line coding in optical systems. Contents: Development of network elements such as routers, SNMP
Optical Link design with dispersion and power budgeting. Design of nodes. Use of laboratory and telecom field test instruments such
digital and analog communication systems. Optical amplifiers, WDM as: oscilloscopes, oscillators, RMS meters, transmission impairment
system design. Hybrid fiber co-axial/microwave links. measuring systems, return loss meters, etc. Enables students to study
voice and data switching functions and to measure transmission and
ELL718 Statistical Signal processing
traffic characteristics on models of the major business communication
3 Credits (3-0-0) systems and carrier transmission facilities (controlled LAN
environments, Ethernet, E1, T1 / T3lines). Experimental procedures
Pre-requisite(s): ELL711
include the use of frequency and time division multiplex systems and
Review of random variables, GS orthogonalization, geometric
the modulation techniques employed by in such systems and the
concepts, notions of projection, random processes, WSS processes,
observation of noise and distortion effects.
properties of autocorrelation and power spectral densities, properties
of autocorrelation matrices, Cholesky decomposition, eigen-analysis, ELV720 Special Module in Communication Systems and
optimum Linear filtering, LMS and its performance, variants, Least- Networking-I
squares, QR decomposition and SVD, RLS and its performance,
1 Credit (1-0-0)
square-root RLS, Kalman Filters, spectrum modelling.
ELL721 Introduction to Telecommunication Systems
ELp718 Telecommunication Software Laboratory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-1-4)
Contents: CASE tools, object-oriented program development, use Pre-requisite(s): Only for MBA students of Bharti School, Audit
of telecom network simulator, implementation using C/C++/Java, for others
network management software design, V.5 test and simulation. Fundamentals of signals, signal transmission and media, modulation
techniques, equalization, amplification, crosstalk, attenuation,
ELL719 Detection and Estimation Theory
switching principles, telephony, signaling, transmission systems-DSL,
3 Credits (3-0-0) optical, radio.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL711 ELp721 Embedded Telecommunication Systems
Overview of the course, Classical Decision Theory: Binary hypothesis Laboratory
testing: Bayes criterion, Neyman-Pearson criterion, min-max test,
3 Credits (0-1-4)
M-ary hypothesis testing: General rule, minimum probability of error
decision rule, Gaussian case and associated geometric concepts,
ELL722 Antenna Theory and Techniques
Erasure decision problem, Random parameter estimation. Non –
3 Credits (3-0-0)
random parameter estimation: CRLB for nonrandom parameters,
ML estimation rule, asymptotic properties of ML estimates. Linear Review of electromagnetism and vector calculus, history and context
minimum variance estimation, Least squares methods CRLB for of antenna theory, operation of various antenna types, such as
random parameter estimation, condition for statistical efficiency, dipole, linear, loop, and resonant type, characterization of antenna
Multiple parameter estimation, Composite and non-parametric performance metrics, and introduction to numerical techniques for
hypothesis testing, Applications, Detection of signals. visualizing antenna radiation patterns.
Mathematical preliminaries: K-L expansion and its application ELL723 Broadband Communication Systems
to Detection of known and un-known (i.e. with unknown,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
parameters) signals in AWGN., Detection of signals in colored
Multiple Access Techniques – CSMA, Spread Spectrum (SS), Direct
noise. Linear estimation, Wiener filters and solution of Wiener
Spread SS, Frequency Hopping SS and CDMA, Timing Synchronization,
HopfEquations,Kalman-Bucyfilters, Miscellaneous estimation
Delay Lock Loop, ISDN Physical Layer, ISDN Data Link Layer, Signaling
techniques.
System Number 7, Broadband ISDN Protocols, ATM Switch and
ELp719 Microwave Laboratory Protocols, CLOS Network Switch, OFDM Concept, OFDMA System,
Multi-Carrier CDMA, WiMAX.
3 Credits (0-1-4)
Design, fabrication and testing of simple linear microwave circuits ELL724 Multichannel Signal processing
using microstrip technology.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL720 Advanced Digital Signal processing Wave Propagation: Wave equation, plane and spherical wave solution
3 Credits (3-0-0) in Cartesian co-ordinate system, wave solution in spherical co-ordinate
system, Introduction of Spherical Harmonics.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL205
Mathematical Preliminaries of ASP: Linear Algebra Basics, Array Signal
Overlaps with: ELL319 Processing Basics, Optimization Algorithms.
Review of Signals and Systems, Sampling and data reconstruction Acoustic Source Localization: Data model, correlation and subspace
processes. based (MUSIC, root-MUSIC) localization, wideband and narrowband
Z transforms. source localization. Source activity detection, Localization and Tracking.
Discrete linear systems. Brain Source Localization for BCI Control: Introduction of Head
Frequency domain design of digital filters. harmonics for brain source localization (BSL), Application of BSL in BCI
Quantization effects in digital filters. control, and physiological shape description for medical application.
Discrete Fourier transform and FFT algorithms. Source Estimation: Fixed beamforming, Null steering, adaptive
High speed convolution and its application to digital filtering. beamforming.
182

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
Beampattern Design: Robust/non-robust, Frequency invariant, least ELL730 I.C. Technology
square, Joint optimization. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Multichannel Signal Enhancement: Time and frequency domain-based Course Introduction, Modern Semiconductor IC fabrication Industrial/
enhancement, Joint Diagonalization, Noise rejection, Binary Masking Academic Landscape; Overview of modern CMOS process flow –
and beamforming. basic steps; Crystal growth and wafer basics; Cleanroom basics –
More Application: Source separation, Dereverberation environment, infrastructure, advanced MOS cleaning, getering etc.
Lithography; Oxidation; Diffusion; Ion-Implantation; Thin-Film
ELL725 Wireless Communications
Deposition; Etching; Backend processes; Process Simulation- tools,
3 Credits (3-0-0) techniques and methods; Advanced device fabrication concepts – I
(SOI, FDSOI, etc); Advanced device fabrication concepts – II (organic,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL712
PV, hetero); Advanced device fabrication concepts – III (CNTs,
The wireless channel (physical modeling, linear time-varying system,
Self-assembly etc).
discrete-time baseband model, time and frequency coherence), point-
to-point communication (detection, diversity, spatial multiplexing), ELV730 Special Modules in V&ES–I
cellular systems (multiple access and interference management),
1 Credit (1-0-0)
capacity of point-to-point wireless channels (single and multi-
antenna), capacity of single-antenna multiuser channels, point- Pre-requisite(s): to be decide by instructor
to-point multi-antenna (MIMO) channels and spatial multiplexing,
point-to-point MIMO capacity and multiplexing architectures. ELL731 Mixed Signal Circuit Design
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELp725 Wireless Communication Laboratory
Pre-requisite(s): ELL782
3 Credits (0-1-4)
Switched capacitor circuit principles and applications in filter design;
EL.L726 Nano-photonics and plasmonics issues of clock feed through, charge injection and other non-idealities;
3 Credits (3-0-0) design of switches; data converters: characteristics, static and
dynamic; types of ADCs; track and hold, and sample and hold circuits;
EM Waves, Maxwell’s Equations, Boundary Conditions, Drude, Debye,
comparators; flash ADCs; pipelined ADCs; successive approximation
Lorentz-Drude Dispersion Relation Models, Introduction to Surface
register type ADCs; discrete-time and continuous time delta-sigma
Plasmons, Surface Plasmon Excitation Mechanisms, Plasmonic
ADCs; higher order delta-sigma design; MASH structure; multi-bit
Nanogratings, Localized Surface Plasmon based Devices, Optical and
delta-sigmas; decimation filtering – sinc and comb filters; digital to
Plasmonic Interconnects, Sensors based on Surface Plasmons, SERS
analog conversion; voltage-based DACs; charge-based DACs; current-
based sensing, Photonic Crystals, Optical Metamaterials, Fabrication
based DACs – binary and thermometer currents; linearizing techniques
of Nanomaterials and Plasmonic Devices.
for DACs; delta-sigma DACs; interpolation filtering; phase-locked loop
ELL727 Digital Communication and Information basics; PLL dynamics; frequency synthesis; all-digital PLLs.
Systems
ELV731 Special Modules in NE&pS–I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Review of Fourier Transforms, Sampling Theorem, Quantization,
Pulse Code Modulation, Digital Modulation Schemes – BPSK, QPSK, Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor
BFSK, QASK, MPSK,Random Processes, Probability density function,
ELL732 Micro and Nanoelectronics
Gaussian density function, Frequency domain representation of
noise, Spectral components of noise, Noise bandwidth, Properties 3 Credits (3-0-0)
of noise, Noise Performance Analysis of digital modulation schemes. Technology basics and digital logic families such as static CMOS, pass
Information Theory, Concept of information, Coding to increase transistor, transmission gate, dynamic and domino logic. Advanced
average information per bit, Shannon’s theorem, Capacity of Gaussian sequential logic elements with latch-based design and timing and
Channel, Bandwidth-S/N tradeoff. Discrete memory-less channel clocking concepts. Power and delay of digital circuits. Physical and
capacity. Error correcting codes, Block codes, Cyclic redundancy logical synthesis for ASICs and FPGAs. Verilog and VHDL with design
check, Coding gain, Bit error rate calculations. examples. Design for testability with fault models.
ELL728 Optoelectronic Instrumentation ELL733 Digital ASIC Design
3 Credits (3-0-0) 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Introduction to test and measuring instruments, instrumentation Pre-requisite(s): ELL308
amplifier, chopper stabilized amplifier, analog signal processing:
active filter, A/D, D/A converters, integrated, transimpedance and low Overlaps with: CSL316
impedance pre-amplifiers design, sample & hold circuits, multiplexer, Review of working of MOSFET, large signal and small signal models,
peak detector, zero crossing detector etc., digital design: PALs, FPGA, biasing schemes, analysis and design of various single stage amplifier
signal analyzer: superheterodyne spectrum analyzer, DFT and FFT configuration, Noise and distortion analysis, Mismatch and non-
analyzer, digital filters and computer interface, microcontrollers: linearity, low and high frequency analysis of single stage amplifiers,
introduction to microcontroller and applications such as 8031, optical frequency compensation, current mirrors and reference circuits,
post, in-line and pre-amplifiers, noise figure, optoelectronic circuits: multistage amplifiers; differential and operational amplifiers, negative
transmitter and receiver design, OTDR, optical spectrum analyzer, and positive feedback, oscillators and power amplifiers.
sensors: fiber optic and radiation types, distributed sensors, fiber
ELL734 MOS VLSI design
optic smart structure, display devices.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL729 Stochastic Control and Reinforcement Learning Digital integrated circuit design perspective. Basic static and dynamic
3 Credits (3-0-0) MOS logic families. Sequential Circuits. Power dissipation and delay in
Basics of dynamic programming, Finite horizon MDP with quadratic circuits. Arithmetic Building blocks, ALU. Timing Issues in synchronous
cost, Optimal stopping problems, Partially observable MDP, Infinite design. Interconnect Parasitics.
horizon discounted cost problems, Stochastic shortest path
ELV734 Special Module in Scientific Writing for
problems, Undiscounted cost problems, Average cost problems,
Research
Semi-Markov decision process, Constrained MDP, Basics of stochastic
approximation, Kiefer-Wolfowitz algorithm, Simultaneous perturbation 1 Credit (1-0-0)
stochastic approximation, Q learning and its convergence analysis. Tools needed for scientific writing, ethics of publication, plagiarism,
183

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
attribution, copyrights, writing impactful papers, writing theses, modeling, Resistor modeling, FEOL capacitor modeling, Advanced
writing a technical disclosure or patent. CMOS Technology, MOS transistor modeling, modeling of process
variations, Mismatch and corners.
ELL735 Analog Integrated Circuits
3 Credits (3-0-0) ELp740 On-wafer Device Characterization Laboratory
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL304
Introduction to MOSFETs, Single stage amplifiers, Biasing circuits, Pre-requisite(s): Any one of :ELL732/ELL740/ELL211/ELL231/
Voltage and Current reference circuits, Feedback analysis, Multistage CRL621/CRL722/CRL621/PYL306/PYL653/PYL702/MLL738
amplifiers, Mismatch and noise analysis, Differential amplifiers, High Semiconductor parameter analyzer and SCPI, Measurements of on-
speed and low noise amplifiers, Output stage amplifiers, Oscillators. wafer test structures using wafer prober, Measurements of packaged
(SMT) devices using packaged IC tester, p-n junction diode DC IV
ELL736 Solid State Imaging Sensors
& CV characterization at room temperature and model parameter
3 Credits (3-0-0) extraction, p-n junction diode DC IV & CV characterization at
higher temperatures, MOS capacitor CV characterization at room
Pre-requisite(s): ELL304, ELL782
temperature, MOSFET DC ld-Vg and ld-Vd characterization at room
Radiometry and Photometry (Light radiation, photometry, light source,
temperature, MOSFET DC characterization using Cryogenic Probe
light units), Introduction to properties of silicon and photon absorption,
Station, RF characterization using 2-port S-parameters, MOSF.ET
Imager formats, Basics of image sensors (fundamental definition of
RF characterization at room temperature, MOSFET large-signal
image sensors, pixels, photo-conversion principles, Charge coupled
RF characterization using load-pull method, MOSFET Flicker noise
devices (operational principles, types and performance metrics),
characterization at room temperature, Lab project.
CMOS image sensors (operational principles, types and performance
metrics), Noise, quantum efficiency, dynamic range and modulation ELL741 Neuromorphic Engineering
transfer function analysis in image sensors, High speed image sensors,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Back side illumination, Electron multiplication CCDs and CMOS, Colour
detection in silicon, 3D imaging, machine vision cameras, polarization Motivation and field Introduction, Emerging computing trends and
detection and scientific applications. roadmap, non-von Neumann computing approach; Basic Biology –
1: Neuron, Synapse, Synaptic Plasticity; Basic Biology -2 : Learning
ELp736 physical Design Laboratory rules, Retina, Cochlea, STDP; Mathematical/Electrical modeling
of Neurons - LIF, IF, HH; Hardware Implementation of Neuron
3 Credits (0-0-6)
circuits – VLSI Digital/Analog; Advanced Nanodevices for Neuron
Implementation; Hardware Implementation of Synaptic and Learning
ELL737 Flexible Electronics
circuits – VLSI Digital/Analog; Advanced Nanodevices for Synaptic
3 Credits (3-0-0) emulation – 1 (NVM, Flash etc); Advanced Nanodevices for Synaptic
Pre-requisite(s): ELL218, ELL111, or ELL732 or equivalent emulation – 2 (RRAM, memristors, CNT etc); Synaptic programming
methodology optimization; Nanodevice specific bio-inspired learning
Introduction to displays and lighting technologies, solar cells, and
rule optimization; Full Network design example -1: Visual Application;
sensors. Flexible substrates. Low cost materials. Solution-processed
Full Network design example -2: Auditory Application; Full system
fabrication methods. Printing methods. Flexible displays. Flat panel
level power/energy dissipation considerations and course conclusion.
lighting. Flexible solar cells. Low-cost sensors.
ELL742 Introduction to MEMS Design
ELL738 Micro and Nano photonics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: CRL726
Pre-requisite(s): PYL101
This course is an introduction to the multi-disciplinary and rapidly
Overlaps with: PYL795
growing area of MEMS. A MEMS design engineer requires knowledge
Ray Optics; Wave Optics: Plane Waves, Spherical Waves, Interference, of several domains –namely mechanical, electrical, fluidic and thermal,
Diffraction; Paraxial Waves; Beam Optics; Fabry Perot Cavity; as well as knowledge of circuits and microfabrication techniques. This
Microresonators - Ring Resonators, Disc Resonators; Review of course will cover the fundamentals as applicable to MEMS, as well as
Electromagnetic (EM) Theory; Boundary Conditions; and some relevant several case studies to understand the design process.
EM problems; FDTD and FEM modeling; Fundamentals of Plasmonics
- Surface Plasmon Resonance, Dispersion relation, Plasmon coupling ELL743 photovoltaics
conditions, Plasmonic gratings, Models describing the refractive 3 Credits (3-0-0)
index of metals; Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance; Plasmonic
Pre-requisite(s): ELL218, ELL111(UG), ELL732(PG)
Sensors and Devices; Surface-enhanced Raman Scattering; Plasmonic
waveguides and Interconnects; Photonic Crystals and Devices. Overlaps with: ELL739
Solid state device physics, p-n and p-i-n junctions. Homojunctions and
ELL739 Advanced Semiconductor Devices
heterojunctions. Generation and recombination processes. Radiation
3 Credits (3-0-0) basics. Photon absorption. Photovoltaic efficiency. Thin film fabrication
Pre-requisite(s): ELL732(PG) processes. Silicon-based solar cells. III-V and chalcogenide-based solar
cells. Multijunction architectures. Dye-sensitized solar cells. Organic
Solid state device physics, generation and recombination processes,
solar cells. Plasmonic structures. Solar cell economics and policy.
radiation basics, density of states, gain and absorption, LEDs, OLEDs,
heterojunction LEDs, lasers, population inversion, photodetectors,
ELL744 Electronic and photonic Nanomaterials
CCDs, image sensors, photocurrent, solar cells, efficiency measures,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
multijunction PVs, organic solar cells, economics, memory devices,
sensors, MEMS devices. 1D, 2D and 3D confinement; Density of states; Excitons; Coulomb
blockade; Optical properties of semiconducting nanoparticles:
ELL740 Compact Modeling of Semiconductor Devices Fluorescence of semiconductor nanocrystals, core-shell nanocrystals,
3 Credits (3-0-0) effect of nanocrystal size; Optical properties of metallic nanoparticles:
Surface Plasmons, Localized Surface Plasmons, Surface-enhanced
Pre-requisite(s): Any course on MOS devices or Microelectronics
Raman scattering; Electronic Applications of Nanomaterials: Nanowire
or Physical Electronics or VLSI technology transistors, Memory Devices, Single electron devices, Biosensors;
Introduction to AMS enablement and PDK elements, Basics of Optical Applications of Nanomaterials - Quantum well, wire, and
semiconductor devices, Device modeling tools-TCAD and SPICE, Diode dot Diodes, Lasers and Detectors, Chemical sensors, Gas sensors,
184

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
Biosensors; Development of Electronic and Optical Nanomaterials: compensation, load balancing using load compensation techniques:
Epitaxial Growth, Deposition of Nanomaterials, Self-Assembly passive shunt and series compensation, DSTATCOM (Distribution
of Nanomaterials, Nanofabrication techniques; Characterization Static Compensators), DVR (Dynamic Voltage Restorers), UPQC
of Nanomaterials: Electron microscopic techniques (scanning (Universal Power Quality Conditioners).
and transmission), Atomic Force Microscopy, X-Ray Diffraction, Harmonic effects-within the power system, interference with
Characterization of optical and electronic properties of nanomaterials. communication Harmonic measurements. Harmonic elimination-using
active (shunt, series and hybrid) and passive (shunt and series) filters.
ELL745 Quantum Electronics
Improved power quality converters: single ac-dc converters,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
bridgeless isolated converter, bridgeless non-isolated converters,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL732(PG) multi-pulse converters, multilevel converters, line commutated
converters, power quality improvement in SMPS, UPS, drives, welding
Overlaps with: ELL739
systems, lighting systems, and renewable energy systems.
Newtonian mechanics, wavepackets, brief history of quantum
mechanics, blackbody radiation, photoelectric effect, wave-particle ELL749 Semiconductor Memory Design
duality, second quantization, Semiconductor materials, crystal
3 Credits (3-0-0)
structure and defects, Bravais lattices, Brillouin zones, Miller
indices, periodic potentials, Kronig-Penney model, bandstructure in Pre-requisite(s): ELL734
bulk semiconductors, Bloch theorem, direct and indirect bandgap
semiconductors, effective mass, effect of alloying, carrier statistics, ELL750 Modelling of Electrical Machines
superlattices and quantum wells, density of states in 0,1,2 and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 dimensions, bandstructure in lower dimensional systems,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL203
heterojunctions, effect of strain on bandstructure, excitonic effects
in semiconductors, tunneling, perturbation theory, scattering and Review of dynamic Modeling of systems, Basic concepts of
collisions, phonons, high-field transport, Boltzmann transport theory, electromechanical energy conversion, Modeling of Transformer,
spin transport, excitons, optical processes in semiconductors and Generalized Theory of Electrical machines, Modeling of DC Machine,
quantum wells, absorption, gain, spontaneous and stimulated Induction Machine, Wound Field Synchronous machine, and special
emission, fluorescence and phosphorescence, photophysics of organic machines such as BLDC, PMSM etc.
molecules and polymers.
ELV750 Special Modules in AE–I
ELL746 Biomedical Electronics 1 Credit (1-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL751 Appliance Systems
Introduction to Biomedical Instrumentation: Constraints, Regulations
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and health economics, Basic sensors, amplifiers and signal processing,
Origin of bio potentials and electrode systems, Bio potential amplifiers, Pre-requisite(s): ELL203, ELL332 ELL365
sources of noise and their Remedies, Blood pressure and heart sound Introduction to Domestic Appliances, Embedded System Design
systems, Measurement of flow and volume of blood Measurement issues, Ergonomic Design aspects, Review of Electrical Machines
of respiratory system, Ultrasonography, CAT, PET and MRI overview, and Drives, Review of Embedded Systems, Drive and Control of
Fuzzy Logic and its application medical instruments, Embedded system Washing Machines, Refrigerators, Air Conditioners, Mixer-Grinders /
in medical electronics with selection of one microprocessor and Food Processors, Ceiling and other types of Fans, Introduction to
then design tips, Overview of pace maker, defibrllator, hemodialysis Industrial Appliances, Drives and Control of Industrial Appliances,
and infant incubators. Safety codes and standards, Electro- Computer Aided Simulation and Design of Drives and Control of
chemical sensor, Ion Selective FET, Immunologically sensitive FET, Appliances, Smart Appliances.
Spectrophotometry, Optical biosensors, Fibre-optic sensors, blood
glucose sensor, smell sensor, SAW devices, Sensor neural network, ELL751 power Electronic Converters
Expert systems and case studies of design examples. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL747 Active and passive Filter Design Introduction to various power switching devices and their control,
introducing various power electronic circuits for realization of AC-
3 Credits (3-0-0)
DC, AC-AC, DC-AC, DC-DC conversion, principle of operation, and
Pre-requisite(s): ELL202 or circuit theory analysis, pulse-width modulation and pulse frequency control of
Review of network theorems such as reciprocity, Tellegen’s theorem, power electronic converters, design problems on power electronic
scattering parameters, properties of lossless passive networks; converter systems.
Butterworth approximation; Chebyshev approximation; synthesis of
ELL752 Electric Drive System
Butterworth and Chebyshev filters; odd versus even order filters;
sensitivity of lossless LC ladder filters; frequency transformations; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
inverse Chebyshev and elliptic approximations; synthesis of Components of electric drive system- electrical machines, power
inverse Chebyshev and elliptic filters; review of properties of p.r. converters and control system. Different types of loads encountered
functions; Darlington synthesis; signal flow graphs of ladder filters; in modern drive applications. dynamics of drive systems, starting,
opamp-RC implementation; Gm-C implementation; switched- braking, speed-control, steady-state and dynamic operation of motors,
capacitor implementation; minimum required performance of load variations, closed loop control of drives, phase controlled and
active components; tuning of filters; transmission line based filters: chopper controlled dc drives, induction motor drives,synchronous
using high-Z low-Z technique, using Kuroda’s identities; bi-quad motor drives, space phasor model, v/f control, direct and indirect
based design approaches and drawbacks; Tow-Thomas biquad, vector control, direct torque control, PMSM drives, BLDC drive, drive
Sallen-Key biquad. controller design.
ELL748 System-on-Chip Design and Test ELV752 Special Modules in EET–I
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL201
ELL753 physical phenomena in Electrical Machines
Overview and definition of power quality (PQ), Sources of pollution,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
International power quality standards, and regulations. Power quality
monitoring. Power quality problems. Loads which causes power Engineering and physical aspects of rotating machines. Modern
quality problems. machine windings. Winding analysis and mmf waveforms. Space
Power factor correction, zero voltage regulation, reactive power and time harmonics. Saturation. Unbalanced magnetic pull and
185

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
magnetic noise in industrial machines. Heating/Cooling. Unbalanced SMPS, UPS, drives, welding systems, lighting systems, and renewable
and asymmetrical operation of induction motors. Special phenomena energy systems.
in electrical machines such as capacitor self excitation of induction
machines and its applications. Use of electromagnetic field theory, ELL759 power Electronic Converters for Renewable
performance of permanent magnet machines. Magnetic levitation Energy Systems
Superconductors and applications. Permanent magnet and Switched 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Reluctance Motors.
Current status and future developments in renewable energy.
Requirements for solar and wind power generation from the grid. Solar
ELV753 Special Modules in ET–I
Power – PV system configurations, Solar cell technologies, Maximum
1 Credit (1-0-0)
power point tracking, Photovoltaic Inverters different types of topologies
and control strategies. Wind power – Wind power energy system,
ELL754 permanent Magnet Machines
types of wind turbines- fixed speed and variable speed, different types
3 Credits (3-0-0) of converters – AC-DC-AC converters, matrix converters, multilevel
Introduction to Permanent Magnet Machines, Permanent Magnet DC converter, control of converters. Fuel cells and battery energy storage
Commutator Machines, Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machines, systems. Grid synchronization and PLL, Grid regulations. Islanding
Permanent Magnet Brushless DC machines, Hysteresis motors, operation. Control of converters for fault operation. Filter design.
Stepper Motors. Various applications of permanent magnet machines Relevant IEEE and IEC standards for renewable energy systems.
in field of robotics, solar pumping, wind energy generation system
ELL760 Switched Mode power Conversion
and others. Computer aided simulation studies for modeling and
performance analysis of these drive systems. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
To give an introduction about the power switching devices such as
ELL755 Variable Reluctance Machines
Thyristors, GTO, MOSFETS, BJT, IGBT and MCTS. Basic concept of
3 Credits (3-0-0) gate drivers (Trigger techniques, optical isolators, protection circuits,
Design, modeling, construction, operation and control of variable and isolation transformers), snubber design and protection schemes of
reluctance machines including hybrid motors and their applications. power devices are to be discussed. Basic circuit configurations, design
Distinguishing factors between the variable reluctance machines and analysis of choppers (step-up, step-down, step-up/down and
and various conventional machines. Study of possible replacement multi-phase choppers), DC-DC converters (non-isolated and isolated),
of conventional machines by the variable reluctance machines for inverters (voltage and current source and multi-level configurations)
specific applications. Applications of reluctance machines in robotics, are discussed. This is followed by improved power quality converters
renewable energy systems & Electric vehicle. (non-isolated and isolated) for reduction of harmonics at AC mains.
ELL756 Special Electrical Machines ELL761 power Electronics for Utility Interface
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overview of power electronic converters for utility applications,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL103
Converter requirements for Grid-interface, Harmonic compensation,
Introduction to Special Electrical Machines and Magnetic Devices, Instantaneous power theory, STATCOM and active filtering and Control
Permanent Magnet Machines, Permanent Magnet Brushless DC of converters under grid-faults.
Machines, Permanent Magnet Brushless Synchronous Machines,
Stepper Motors, Hysteresis Motors, Switched Reluctance Motors, ELL762 Intelligent Motor Controllers
Hybrid Motors, Linear Machines, Magnetic Devices, Applications 3 Credits (3-0-0)
in Robotics, Industry Automation, Electric Vehicles, Aerospace and
Pre-requisite(s): ELL332
Defense Systems, etc., Super conducting Machines, Written Pole
Machines, Micro-motors, PCB motors, Case Studies, Computer Aided Fundamental concepts in control of electric drive systems. Intelligent
Simulation and Design of Special Electrical Machines. Control algorithms used for electric drive systems. Application of
Fuzzy Logic, Neural Networks, Genetic Algorithm, Hybrid Fuzzy and
ELL757 Energy Efficient Motors Nonlinear Control of Power Converters and Drives. Other recent topics
3 Credits (3-0-0) on Intelligent Control of Drives.
Introduction to energy efficiency and its impacts on social life. ELL763 Advanced Electric Drives
Energy-efficient motors, fundamentals of electric motor drives, power
3 Credits (3-0-0)
factor under non sinusoidal conditions, energy efficient induction
motor under different input parameters and applications, adjustable- Pre-requisite(s): ELL332
speed drives their advantages and benefits from efficiency point of Types of Controllers: Proportional-Integral Control, Hysteresis
view, case studies related to induction motor variable seed drive Control etc, Advanced DC Drives: Cascaded Control Loop Structure,
system, brushless dc motor drive, switched reluctance motor drives, Control Loop Design etc, Control of BLDC drive: Modeling and
permanent magnet synchronous motor drive etc. Control of BLDC Drive, Review of Power Converter and Modulation
Techniques: Modeling of Power Converters, Sinusoidal Pulse-Width
ELL758 power Quality Modulation, Space Vector Pulse-Width Modulation, Field Oriented
3 Credits (3-0-0) Control (FOC) of AC Machines: Generalized Space-Phasor Model
Overview and definition of power quality (PQ), Sources of pollution, of AC Machines in different Flux Frames of References, Control
International power quality standards, and regulations. Power quality Principle, FOC of Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machine (PMSM),
monitoring. Power quality problems. Loads which causes power FOC of Squirrel Cage Induction Machine (SQIM), Direct Torque
quality problems. Power factor correction, zero voltage regulation, Control (DTC) of AC Machines: Control Principle, DTC of Squirrel
reactive power compensation, load balancing using load compensation Cage Induction Machine (SQIM).
techniques: passive shunt and series compensation, DSTATCOM
ELL764 Electric Vehicles
(Distribution Static Compensators), DVR (Dynamic Voltage Restorers),
UPQC (Universal Power Quality Conditioners). Harmonic effects- 3 Credits (3-0-0)
within the power system, interference with communication Harmonic Fundamental issues related to electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid
measurements. Harmonic elimination-using active (shunt, series and electric vehicles (HEVs); Various brushless motors such as PMSM,
hybrid) and passive (shunt and series) filters. Improved power quality PMBLDCM, SRM, synchronous reluctance motor, induction motor for
converters: single ac-dc converters, bridgeless isolated converter, EVs. Various types of chargers and energy management strategies.
bridgeless non-isolated converters, multi-pulse converters, multilevel Analysis and simulation of EV systems. Various design and control
converters, line commutated converters, power quality improvement in aspects of electric drives and chargers for EVs and HEVs.
186

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
ELL765 Smart Grid Technology KVAR meters stand by power generation: DG sets, UPS, maintenance
3 Credits (3-0-0) and protection of D.G. sets and UPS.
Introduction:- Smart Grid an Overview; Components of Smart Grid; ELL770 power System Analysis
Intelligent Appliances; Smart Substations; Smart Distributions-
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Generations; Smart Power meters; Universal Access (wind, solar,
hydro etc.) Smart Grid Technologies: Integrated Communications; Pre-requisite(s): ELL303
Sensing and Measurement; Advance Control Methods; Advance Revision of Basic Concepts in pu and modeling, Admittance model
components and Improved Interfaces and Decision Support. Benefits of transmission network, Power Flow solutions (GS, NR, DLF, FDLF,
of Smart Grid: Self-Healing; Power Quality Improvement; Utilization DCLF), Symmetrical components and sequence networks, Faults -
of all generation and storage options; Optimized use of assets and Symmetrical and unsymmetrical, Z Bus building algorithms, State
efficient Operation. Miscellaneous: Smart Grid Challenges; Smart Grid Estimation, Voltage Stability, Continuation Power Flow, Power System
Projects; Contribution of Microgrid in development of Smart Grid. Security (Overload, Voltage), Introduction to WAMS and PMUs, Linear
State Estimation.
ELL766 Appliance Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0) ELL771 Advanced power System protection
Pre-requisite(s): ELL203, ELL332 ELL365 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overview of appliance systems, international standards and Fundamentals of protection, generator protection, transformer
regulations, energy efficient appliances, energy efficiency in motor protection, bus bar protection, over current and differential protection.
driven appliances, classification based on power rating: low, medium, Out of step protection, blinder design. Static relays, Numerical relay.
and high power appliances, classification based on supply power: Wide area protection.
single-phase and three-phase, classification based on drives system, ELL772 planning and Operation of a Smart Grid
heating systems and renewable system.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
To understand the various types of appliance systems used in domestic
and office or commercial scenarios. Pre-requisite(s): ELL303
Smart grids key characteristics, demand side management, load
Low power appliances (working, types, power quality problems,
characteristics, hybrid electric vehicles, energy markets, deregulation,
numerical examples): laptops, mobile, fans, lighting system(CFL, LED,
wide area monitoring, protection and control, smart metering,
solar), water pumps, TV (LCD, LED Plasma), UPS, SMPS, computer,
adaptive relaying, power line carrier communication and networking,
printer, scanner, hair drier, trimmer, electric rice cooker, induction
architectures and standards, renewable energy, distributed
heater, solar cooker, electric iron, micro-oven, driller etc.
generation, smart grids policies.
Medium power appliances (working, types, power quality problems,
numerical examples): Air conditioner, electrical vehicle, centralized ELL773 High Voltage DC Transmission
heating system, washing machines, refrigerators, welding system, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
solar boiler, water pumps etc.
General aspects and comparison with AC transmission system.
High power appliances (working, types, power quality problems, Thyristor based HVDC Converter and inverter operation. Control
numerical examples): welding machines, hammers, centralized AC of HVDC link. Interaction between AC and DC system. Harmonic
system, etc. generation and their elimination. Protections for HVDC system.
Power quality techniques used in appliances systems. Modeling of HVDC link for AC-DC power flow. AC-DC system power
flow solution techniques. HVDC light.
ELL767 Mechatronics
ELL774 Flexible AC Transmission System
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to mechatronics systems. Various parts of mechatronics
systems. Analog-to-digital-conversion (A/D) and its implementation The phenomenon of voltage collapse; the basic theory of line
using a microcontroller and DSPs. Study of the underlying operational compensation. Static VAR compensators; static phase shifters;
principles and construction of electromagnetic actuators such as DC, thyristors controlled series capacitors. Co-ordination of FACTS devices
AC, and stepping motors. Study of various transducers their working with HVDC links. The FACTS optimization problem. Transient and
principles. Selection of best electrical machines for a given motion dynamic stability enhancement using FACTS components.
control application considering system inertia, external forces or
ELL775 power System Dynamics
torques, and motion profiles. Design and analysis for basic power
3 Credits (3-0-0)
controllers for various applications.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL303
ELL768 Computer Aided Design of power Electronic
Dynamic models of synchronous machines, excitation system,
Systems
turbines, governors, loads. Modelling of single-machine-infinite bus
3 Credits (3-0-0) system. Mathematical modelling of multimachine system. Dynamic
Introduction to modern simulation tools used for the power electronic and transient stability analysis of single machine and multi-machine
systems analysis such as PSPICE, MATLAB, PSIM, SABER etc, Modeling systems. Power system stabilizer design for multimachine systems.
of power electronic systems, filters designs. Introducing to advanced Dynamic equivalencing. Voltage stability Techniques for the
modeling techniques and their transformation into software platform, improvement of stability. Direct method of transient stability analysis:
Closed-loop power electronic systems modeling and their simulation. Transient energy function approach.
ELL769 Electrical Systems for Construction Industries ELL776 Advanced power System Optimization
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Elements of Distribution System: Distribution transformer circuit Introduction to power system optimization problems and linkages.
breakers, Cables, Fuses and protection schemes, Rectifiers, Battery Optimization basics and solution techniques for convex and non
chargers and inverters. Machines and Drives: D.C. Motors, 3-phase convex optimization problems. Basic Optimal power flow. Preventive
induction motors and FKW motors starting, speed control and and corrective security constrained optimal power flow, Unit
braking, Application to air conditioning, lifts, cranes, water pumps. commitment, hydrothermal scheduling, generation, transmission
Illumination: Types of illumination, illumination laws, lamps & fixtures. and reactive expansion planning. Optimization with uncertain data
Electrical Energy Conservation: Modern compact fluorescent lamps, Security states and optimization requirements. Convex and nonconvex
energy audit methods of saving electricity in drives, lighting, air optimization techniques. Static and dynamic optimization techniques.
conditioning, pumps and distributions systems metering, KW, KWh and Day ahead and real time market planning. Optimization to handle
187

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
uncertainty in data. Fuzzy and probabilistic techniques. Generation, ELL782 Computer Architecture
transmission and reactive resources planning. Renewable generation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
integration optimization. Effect of markets and renewable generation
Instruction set design, pipelining, memory hierarchy design,
in resources planning.
parallelism in various forms, warehouse scale computers, specific
ELL777 power System operation and control topics such as Vector, SIMD, GPU architectures, Embedded Systems,
VLIW, EPIC, Multi-core architectures.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Control of active power. Turbine, governor and boiler modelling and ELp782 Computer Networks Lab
control. Hydro and steam turbines, load frequency control, Automatic
3 Credits (0-1-4)
generation control in single-area and multi-area systems. Under-
frequency load shedding, secondary frequency control. Automatic Simulation and hardware experiments on different aspects of
voltage regulators, excitation systems – modelling and control, computer communication networks. Network traffic generation and
small-signal stability studies, power system stabilizers, on-load tap- analysis, differentiated service queues, network of queues using
changing transformers. discrete event simulations.
ELL778 Dynamic Modelling And Control of Sustainable ELL783 Operating Systems
Energy Systems 4 Credits (3-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Processes and threads; CPU scheduling; concurrency, synchronisation;
Microgrids and distributed generation; Introduction to renewable deadlocks; Memory management; files and I/O; Real-time operating
energy technologies; electrical systems and generators used in wind systems; basics of Cloud computing.
energy conversion systems,diesel generators, combined heat cycle
ELL784 Introduction to Machine Learning
plants, inverter based generation, solar PV based systems, fuel cell and
aqua-electrolyzer, battery and flywheel based storage system; Voltage 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and frequency control in a microgrid; Grid connection interface issues. Pre-requisite(s): MTL106
ELL779 Forecasting Techniques for power System Overlaps with: ELL409, COL341, COL774
3 Credits (3-0-0) Introduction to Machine intelligence and learning; linear learning
models; Artificial Neural Networks: Single Layer Networks, LTUs,
Principles of forecasting load, wind and price. Statistical and non
Capacity of a Single Layer LTU, Nonlinear Dichotomies, Multilayer
statistical based approaches. AI application for forecasting.
Networks, Growth networks, Backpropagation and some variants;
ELD780 Minor project Support Vector Machines: Origin, Formulation of the L1 norm SVM,
Solution methods (SMO, etc.), L2 norm SVM, Regression, Variants of
2 Credits (0-0-4)
the SVM; Complexity: Origin, Notion of the VC dimension, Derivation
ELL780 Mathematical Foundations of Computer for an LTU, PAC learning, bounds, VC dimension for SVMS, Learning
low complexity machines - Structural Risk Minimisation; Unsupervised
Technology
learning: PCA, KPCA; Clustering: Origin, Exposition with some selected
3 Credits (3-0-0)
methods; Feature Selection: Origin, Filter and Wrapper methods, State
Probability theory, stochastic processes, and statistical inference. of the art - FCBF, Relief, etc; Semi-supervised learning: introduction;
Elements of real and complex analysis, and linear algebra. Assignments/Short project on these topics.
Optimization, with an emphasis on application and implementation.
ELL785 Computer Communication Networks
ELp780 Software Lab
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-1-4)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106/ELL711
Experiments related to the following topics: advanced data
Overlaps with: CSL374, CSL672 (20%)
structures and algorithms, compilers, GUI, component-based
software design, distributed and web based applications, UML, Theory/Lecture: Review of data communication techniques, basic
firmware, database applications. networking concepts, layered network and protocol concepts, quality
of service, motivations for cross-layer protocol design. Motivations for
ELV780 Special Module in Computers performance analysis, forward error correction and re-transmission
1 Credit (1-0-0) performances, Markov and semi-Markov processes, Little’s theorem,
M/M/m/k, M/G/1 systems, priority queueing, network of queues,
ELL781 Software Fundamentals for Computer Technology network traffic behavior. Concepts and analysis of multi-access
3 Credits (3-0-0) protocols; contention-free and contention multi-access protocols.
Basic graph theoretic concepts, routing algorithms and analysis.
Introduction, data structures for combinatorial optimization: heaps,
union-find, Fibonacci heaps, dynamic trees, dynamic graph structure; Suggested lab Course content:
Asymptotic analysis; Divide & conquer and graph algorithms: Graph Laboratory: Simulation and hardware experiments on different aspects
search: Breadth first, depth first, topological sorting, Fast Fourier of computer communication networks. Network traffic generation
Transform, Matrix Multiplication, Shortest path algorithms; Additional and analysis, differentiated service queues, network of queues using
Data Structures: Suffix trees & string matching, Splay trees & discrete event simulations.
amortized analysis; Advanced algorithmic design techniques: Dynamic
programming (edit distance, chains of matrix multiplication, etc.), ELL786 Multimedia Systems
Network flow and its use for solving problems; Linear and integer 3 Credits (3-0-0)
programming, NP-completeness, Randomized algorithms (hashing
Multimedia signal processing; coding and compression; standards:
& global minimum cut), Approximation Algorithms; Object oriented
logic, issues, future directions; Multimedia issues governing
Software design, Design of Dependable Software.
developments in computer architecture and embedded systems,
computer and communication networks, operating systems; Search
ELp781 Digital Systems Lab
and retrieval.
3 Credits (0-1-4)
ELL787 Embedded Systems and Applications
ELV781 Special Modules in Information processing-I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0) Introduction to embedded system. Architectural Issues: CISC, RISC,
Pre-requisite(s): to be decided by the instructor DSP Architectures.
188

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
Component Interfacing, Software for Embedded Systems : Program Introduction to Cell Biology (DNA and Proteins); Introduction to
Design and Optimisation techniques, O.S for Embedded Systems, Evolution; Modelling Evolution (Genetic Algorithms, Quasispecies);
Real-time Issues. Designing Embedded Systems : Design Issues, Genomic Signal Processing; Transcriptomic/Proteomic signals;
Hardware- Software Co-design, Use of UML. Embedded Control Regulatory networks and dynamics; Protein interaction networks;
Applications, Networked Embedded Systems : Distributed Embedded Signal transduction and metabolic networks; Evolvability and Learning.
Architectures, Protocol Design issues, wireless network. Embedded Project activities on these topics (involving the use of online biological
Multimedia and Telecommunication Applications: Digital Camera, databases and bioinformatics software tools); Student presentations
Digital TV, Set-top Box, Voice and Video telephony. and Journal Club.
ELL788 Computational perception and Cognition ELL797 Energy-Efficient Computing
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction: Philosophical & Psychological models, Cognitive models Introduction and Motivation, Energy-Efficient Techniques in Operating
& Bayesian Inferencing framework; Visual Perception of 3D space & Systems (Power Aware Scheduling, Adaptation for Multimedia
scene; Perceptual processes for Object recognition & memorization; Applications, Power aware memory and I/O device management,
Auditory Perception; Haptic Perception; Attentional mechanism multiprocessor systems.), Storage, Compilers, Networks and Data Centers,
in multimedia perception; Applications: Image & video quality Power management for Wearable devices and pervasive computing.
assessment, compression; Audio quality assessment, compression
ELL798 Agent Technologies
& indexing; Haptic interfaces; Cognitive Architecture; Computational
Consciousness, Cognitive Robotics & Other applications. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will comprise lectures on the various topics on agent
ELL789 Intelligent Systems
technology and self-study on its applications in various domains.
3 Credits (3-0-0) The topics are elaborated below. The material of the lectures will be
Overlaps with: COL333, COL671, COL770 gathered from text-books and recent research papers. The self-study
will comprise study and analysis of typically 5-8 substantial research
Introduction, Search, Markov Decision Process, Game Playing,
papers and will result in a term paper that will be evaluated.
Constraint Satisfaction, Bayesian Network, Logic, Planning, Searching
with non-deterministic action. ELL799 Natural Computing
ELL790 Digital Hardware Design 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): COL106, MTL106
To provide advanced level exposure to digital hardware design and Introduction to natural computing uncertainty handling: probability
interfacing, elements of hardware software co-design, synthesis and fuzzy logic; evolutionary computing and problem solving as search;
of digital systems at logic/RTL and system levels, simulation swarm intelligence ant colonies, swarm robotics; immunocomputing;
aspects of synthesis. introduction to DNA computing; basics of quantum computing.
ELL791 Neural Systems and Learning Machines JVD799 Minor project
3 Credits (3-0-2) 6 Credits (0-0-12)
Overlaps with: MTL720
ELD800 Minor project (EEA)
Introduction to biological neural systems, artificial neural network models,
3 Credits (0-0-6)
feed forward models, recurrent systems, analysis and applications.
To be decided by the project supervisor.
ELL792 Computer Graphics
ELL800 Numerical Linear Algebra and Optimization in
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Engineering
Image formation: the mathematics, as well as photometry and
colour; transformations; basic graphics primitives; texture mapping; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
image-based rendering. Basics of Linear Algebra; Matrix decomposition - LU, LDU, QR and
Cholesky factorization; Householder reflection, Givens rotation;
JTD792 Minor project Numerical implications of SVD; Numerical Solution for Linear Systems;
3 Credits (0-0-6) Algorithm Stability; Problem Conditioning; Pivoting and scaling; Least
Square Solutions; Numerical Matrix eigenvalue methods; Sparse
ELL793 Computer Vision Systems; Iterative methods for large systems; Krylov, Arnoldi, Lanczos
3 Credits (3-0-0) methods; Numerical Optimization techniques - Conjugate gradient
method, Linear and quadratic programming, Spectral and Pseudo-
Pre-requisite(s): ELL715,ELL784 spectral methods.
Overlaps with: COL780
ELp800 Control Systems Laboratory
Link between Computer Vision, Computer Graphics, Image Processing
1 Credit (0-0-2)
and related fields; feature extraction; camera models; multi-view
geometry; applications of Computer Vision in day-to-day life. Basics of Sensors and Actuators, Study of AC and DC Motors, Linear
Systems, Analog and Digital Motors, Synchros, Temperature Control.
ELL794 Human-Computer Interface
ELD801 Major project part-I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
6 Credits (0-0-12)
This course will present some of the necessary background in
neuroscience and computational methods necessary to begin work To be decided by the project supervisor.
in this emerging field that is rapidly acquiring growing significance.
ELL801 Nonlinear Control
ELL795 Swarm Intelligence 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Overview of nonlinear control, Lyapunov stability for autonomous
Swarm intelligence, distributed optimization, ant colony algorithms, PSO, and non-autonomous systems, Input-Output Stability and Input-to-
firefly, bee, and related methods, applications and implementation issues. State Stability, Passivity analysis and applications, Absolute Stability,
Incremental stability analysis, Lyapunov-based feedback control
ELL796 Signals and Systems in Biology
design, Feedback linearization and backstepping, Sliding mode
3 Credits (3-0-0) control, Nonlinear observer design.
189

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
ELp801 Advanced Control Laboratory network traffic, electromagnetism), Modeling of Distributed Parameter
2 Credits (0-0-4) Systems (DPS): Parabolic and Hyperbolic PDEs, Analytic and Numerical
Solution of PDEs, Lyapunov stability of DPS Boundary control and
Magnetic Levitation System, Twin Rotor MIMO System, Gyroscope, Ball
Observer Design of DPS, Discretization of Distributed Parameter
and Beam System, Embedded Control System, Mobile Robotic System.
Models: Finite Difference, Finite Element and Boundary Elements,
JTD801 Major project-I Reduction of FEM models, Applications: Control of systems with time
delays, control of fluid flow, network control.
6 Credits (0-0-12)
ELL807 Stochastic Control
JVD811 Major project-I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
12 Credits (0-0-24)
Overview of stochastic systems with examples, Modeling of Stochastic
Systems: Continuous and discrete-time models subjected to noise,
JVS801 Independent Study
Markov Decision Processes, Introduction to Stochastic Calculus and
3 Credits (0-3-0) Stochastic Differential Equations, Stochastic Stability, Stochastic
Optimal Control with complete and partial observations, finite and
ELD802 Major project part-II infinite horizon problems, Linear and nonlinear Filtering, Separation
12 Credits (0-0-24) Principle, Linear quadratic Gaussian Problem, Stochastic Dynamic
Programming, Stochastic Adaptive Control, Applications: Finance,
To be decided by the project supervisor.
operations research, biology.
ELL802 Adaptive and Learning Control
ELL808 Advanced Topics in Systems and Control
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to adaptive control, Review of Lyapunov stability theory,
To be decided by the Instructor when floating this course: Can be
Direct and indirect adaptive control, Model reference adaptive
anything that is related to systems and control engineering but is
control, Parameter convergence, persistence of excitation, Adaptive
not covered in any of the established courses.
backstepping, Adaptive control of nonlinear systems, Composite
adaptation, Neural Network-based control, Repetitive learning control, ELD810 Minor project (Communication Engineering)
Reinforcement learning-based control, Predictive control, Robust
3 Credits (0-0-6)
adaptive control.
ELL810 Cyber Security and Information Assurance
JVD812 Major project-II
3 Credits (3-0-0)
12 Credits (0-0-24)
Introduction to cyber security, information assurance, computer
ELL803 Model Reduction in Control security and the associated threat, attack, adversary models, identity
3 Credits (3-0-0) representation, management and access control, intrusion detection,
security at different levels: network, system, user, program security,
Introduction to Model Reduction; Sources of Large Models - Circuits,
network security, wireless security, mobile security, hardware security
Electromagnetic Systems, Mechanical Systems; Discretization Methods
and the security of cyber physical systems.
- Finite Difference Method (FDM), Finite Element Method (FEM);
Classical Model Reduction Methods - Pade Approximation, Moment ELD811 Major project part-I (Communication
matching, Routh Approximants; Modern Methods - Modal Model Engineering)
Reduction Methods, SVD (Grammian) based methods, Krylov based
6 Credits (0-0-12)
methods, SVD-Krylov based methods; MOR for Nonlinear Systems
– SVD & POD Methods; Model Reduction in Control; Control Design
on Reduced Models – Sub- optimal control; Sliding Mode Control as ELD812 Major project part-II
model reducing control - First Order SM, Higher Order Sliding Mode. 12 Credits (0-0-24)
ELL804 Robust Control
ELL812 Microwave propagation and Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Modeling of uncertain systems, Signals and Norms, Lyapunov theory for
Frequency bands and allocations. Earth and its effects on propagation.
LTI systems, Passive systems – frequency domain, Passive systems –
Atmosphere and its effects on propagation. Attenuation of millimeter
time domain, Robust Stability and performance, Stabilizing controllers
waves. Line-of-sight communication links: system configuration,
– Coprime factorization, LQR, LQG problems, Ricatti equations
multiplexing, link design. Troposcatter propagation and links:
and solutions, H-infinity control and mu-synthesis, Linear matrix
Fadingand diversity reception, path profile and path loss, link design,
inequalities for robust control, Ricatti equation solution through LMI.
signal design for fading channels.
ELL805 Networked and Multi-Agent Control Systems
ELL813 Advanced Information Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overview of networked systems, Graph Theory Fundamentals, Graph-
based Network Models, Network Optimization, Consensus Problem: Capacity of single-user Gaussian multi-antenna deterministic channels
cooperative control, leader-follower architecture. and optimal strategies. Reliable transmission in single user state
dependent channels. Capacity of Gaussian single-antenna fading
Control under Communication Constraints, Formation Control,
channels with state (RX CSI, Full CSI). Capacity of single-antenna
Swarming and Flocking Collision Avoidance, Game Theoretic Control
frequency-selective fading channels (OFDM modulation, waterfilling
of Multi-Agent Systems, Applications: Multi-robot/vehicle coordination,
across frequency). Capacity of Gaussian multi-antenna single user
Sensor Networks, Social Networks, Smart Grids, Biological Networks.
fading channels (RX CSI only, Full CSI). Spatial multiplexing gain, array
EEL806 Scientific Visualization gain. Transmitter and receiver architectures, V-BLAST transmission,
Zero-Forcing receiver, MMSE receiver, MMSESIC receiver. Optimality of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MMSE-SIC. Capacity region of the multi-user Gaussian MAC channel.
ELL806 Modeling and Control of Distributed parameter Capacity region of the multiuser Gaussian Broadcast channel (BC)
with single-antenna terminals. Capacity of state dependent channels
Systems
with non-causal side information (Gelfand-Pinsker coding). Dirty
3 Credits (3-0-0) paper coding to pre-cancel known interference. MAC-BC duality.
Overview: Motivation and examples (wave propagation, fluid flow, Capacity region of the multi-user Gaussian Broadcast channel with
190

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
multi-antenna terminals (Dirty paper coding achieves the capacity ELV821 Special Module in Communication Systems and
region). Capacity region of the Interference channel. There are no Networking-II
laboratory or design activities involved in this course.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
ELL814 Wireless Optical Communications
ELL822 Selected Topics in Communication Systems and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Networking-II
General introduction, optical channel modeling, background noise
calculations, Modulation techniques: M-PPM, OOK, mxn PAPM, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
subcarrier modulation, DPPM, DHPIM, DAPPM, psd and bandwidth
ELp822 Network Software Laboratory
requirement evaluation, Detection techniques - Photon counter,
PMT, coherent techniques, bit error rate evaluation in presence of 3 Credits (0-1-4)
atmospheric turbulence, concept of adaptive threshold, effect of Contents: CASE tools,client-server programming, middleware – and
turbulence and weather conditions viz., drizzle, haze fog on error use of Object Request Broker architectures, use of network emulators,
performance and channel capacity, link availability. using networks APIs Parlay/JAIN, service-oriented architectures,
openflow and SDN, network management software design.
ELL815 MIMO Wireless Communications
3 Credits (3-0-0) ELL823 Selected Topics in Information processing-I
Introduction to space-time diversity, MIMO channel, MIMO information 3 Credits (3-0-0)
theory, error probability analysis, transmit diversity and space-time
coding, linear STBC design, differential coding for MIMO, precoding, ELV823 Special Modules in Information processing-II
multiuser MIMO; There are no laboratory or design activities involved 1 Credit (1-0-0)
with this course.
ELL824 Selected Topics in Information processing-II
ELL816 Satellite Communication
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to satellite communication and orbital theory, satellite ELD830 Minor project
antennas, satellite link design, channel models for satellite links, 3 Credits (0-0-6)
modulation, multiple access techniques for satellite communication,
VSAT, introduction to MIMO systems and error analysis, multiple ELL830 Issues in Deep Submicron VLSI Design
antenna based satellite communication, hybrid satellite-terrestrial 3 Credits (3-0-0)
communication system.
VLSI Scaling rules and their impact: Short channel effect, Sub
There are no laboratory or design activities involved with this course. threshold leakage current, Gate leakage, VTH and body bias; Low
power design: Technology level: 3D and 4 terminal MOSFETs, PDSOI,
ELL817 Access Networks
FDSOI, FINFET; Sub threshold leakage control: Transistor stacking in
3 Credits (3-0-0)
digital logic Multiple VTH, VDD designs, Dynamically adjustable VTH;
Contents: Types of access networks, wired (copper and optical) and Digital Circuit Design: Digital Sub-threshold Logic, Noise Immunity,
wireless access networks, management, dimensioning and scaling of Clock gating, Switching activity minimization; Analog Circuit Design:
access networks, access network design. gm/ID Methodology for Design, Low power, low voltage opamp design,
Subthreshold operation of opamps; Architecture level: Array Based
ELL818 Telecommunication Technologies
Architectures, Parallel and Pipelined Architectures; Interconnects
3 Credits (3-0-0) & Noise: Capacitive & Inductive coupling Analysis & Optimization,
Types of Data Networks, types of access and edge networks, core Power/Ground Noise, L*di/dt noise, Power/Ground Placement
networks, OSS/NMS and Telecom Management network (TMN), Optimization, Decoupling.
Teletraffic Theory and Network analysis.
ELp830 Semiconductor processing Laboratory
ELL819 Introduction to plasmonics 3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Deposition of Semiconductor Materials and Metals: Sputter Deposition,
EM Waves, Maxwell’s Equations, Origin of Permittivity, Evanescent E-Beam Deposition, and Thermal Evaporation; Photolithography;
Waves, Surface Plasmons, Scattering and Diffraction, Spoof Surface Electron-Beam Lithography; Epitaxial Growth of Semiconductors,
Plasmon, Extraordinary Optical Transmission, Numerical Simulations Materials Characterization.
of Surface Plasmons, Negative Index Materials.
ELV830 Special Module in Low power IC Design
ELL820 photonic Switching and Networking 1 Credit (1-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Special Module that focuses on special topics, development and
Study of different types of networks, the enabling technologies and Research problems of importance in the area of Low Power IC Design.
devices. Broadcast and Select network. Single and Multi-hop networks
ELD831 Major project part-I (Integrated Electronic
with example of Access networks, PONS etc., Wavelength Routing
Circuits)
network, virtual topology, Metro and Wide area networks. Wavelength
Routing and Assignment, Traffic Grooming and Protection, Network 6 Credits (0-0-12)
Control and Management, Optical packet and burst switching, Network
Simulation Tools and Design guidelines. ELL831 CAD for VLSI, MEMS, and Nanoassembly
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL821 Selected Topics in Communication Systems and
Algorithms for design, modelling, and simulation ranging from VLSI,
Networking-I
MEMS, to nanoassembly; computer aided nano-design for materials.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELp831 IEC Laboratory-I
ELp821 Advanced Telecommunication Networks
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Laboratory
Introduction to Cadence, Learning Cadence design framework and
3 Credits (0-1-4) Virtuoso environment, Design with Virtuoso schematic editor, Layouts,
To provide advanced level laboratory experiments in telecom signaling Learning and applying Synopsys and Xilinx tools, Circuit simulation
and transmission. and SPICE.
191

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
ELV831 Special Module in VLSI Testing ELp850 Electrical Machines Laboratory
1 Credit (1-0-0) 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Special Module that focuses on special topics, development and Experiments on Electrical Machines and their control.
Research problems of importance in the area of VLSI Testing.
ELT850 Industrial Training and Seminar
ELD832 Major project part-II 3 Credits (0-0-6)
12 Credits (0-0-24)
ELD851 Major project part-I
ELL832 Selected Topics in IEC-I 6 Credits (0-0-12)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL851 Computer Aided Design of Electrical Machines
ELp832 IEC Laboratory-II 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6) Introduction of Standards and standardizations, specifications, frame
Introduction to Cadence, Learning Cadence design framework and Virtuoso size, basic design methodology and engineering considerations.
environment, Design with Virtuoso schematic editor, Layouts, Learning Properties of electric, magnetic and insulating materials. Choice
and applying Synopsys and Xilinx tools, Circuit simulation and SPICE. of materials, frames etc. Computerization of design procedures.
Optimization techniques and their application to design problems.
ELV832 Special Module in Machine Learning
Design of large and h.p. motors. Database and knowledge based
1 Credit (1-0-0) expert systems. Development of PC based software.
Special Module that focuses on special topics, development and
ELp851 power Electronics Laboratory
Research problems of importance in this area.
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
ELL833 CMOS RF IC Design
Experiments on Power electronic converters and their control.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELD852 Major project part-II
Historical Aspects – From Maxwell to Current Wireless standards; The
bridge between communication system designer and RF IC Designer: 12 Credits (0-0-24)
a) Comm. system characterization, b)RF System Characterization;
ELL852 Condition Monitoring of Electrical Machines
Transceiver Architectures – Motivation for the individual blocks;
Lumped, passive RLC, RF properties of MOS, Tuned Amplifiers; LNAs: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Noise sources, Cascades and LNA Design; Mixers – passive and active The course includes the need for condition monitoring. Three main
mixers ; Oscillators: Analysis Fundamentals, Inductors, LC Oscillators subdivisions of the course are types of fault and their symptoms,
and VCOs; Frequency synthesizers: Principles, Integer N vs Fractional diagnostic methods to identify these faults and a deep signal
PLL, Design Concepts. processing analysis for fault diagnosis. The various components prone
to fault are stator, rotor, shaft, gear box, bearing etc. The diagnosis
ELp833 Device and Materials Characterization Laboratory
methods includes diagnosis based on temperature, infrared signal,
3 Credits (0-0-6) vibration, noise, motor current signature analysis etc. various signal
Skill development in semiconductor modeling and characterization processing techniques such as fuzzy logic, neural network from fault
through hands on electrical characterization experiments. This diagnosis point of view are also included in this course.
includes wafer-level DC and RF characterization of p-n junction
ELp852 Electrical Drives Laboratory
diode, MOS capacitor and transistor, photo-electric characterization
of solar cells, TCAD and compact modeling of these devices, Materials 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Characterization (SEM, AFM, TEM, etc.). Experiments on drive systems with converter fed dc and ac drives
and their control.
ELV833 Special Module in Semiconductor Business
Management ELL853 Advanced Topics in Electrical Machines
1 Credit (1-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
To educate students about semiconductor business. This includes Introduction to Advanced Topics in Electrical Machines, Synchronous
business domains in semiconductors, latest business challenges, Reluctance Machines, Hybrid Motors, Linear Motors, Super conducting
market trends and forecasts, business planning and incubation, Machines, PCB Motors, Micro motors, Written Pole Machines.
execution and delivery, technical and financial analysis of R&D , Applications of all these advanced motors in field of Robotics,
business and finance models of chip manufacturing units (or fabs.), Automation, Electric Vehicles, pumping etc. The rating consideration
foundries, and solar power plants. and special advantages with these motors in various practical or
field conditions is primary objective of this course. Other Advanced
ELL834 Selected Topics in IEC-II
machines, Case Studies, Computer Aided Simulation of Electrical
3 Credits (3-0-0) Machines are added for enhanced understanding of the topic.
ELV834 Special Module in Nanoelectronics ELp853 DSp Based Control of power Electronics and
1 Credit (1-0-0) Drives Laboratory
Special Module that focuses on special topics, development and 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Research problems of importance in the area of Nano Electronics. Experiments on the DSP/Digital signal controllers, Interfacing peripherals
to DSP, Assembly language programming, Real-time voltage/ current,
ELD850 Minor project
speed sensing signal and processing, PWM strategies realization
3 Credits (0-0-6) through DSP and controlling power electronic and Drive Systems.
ELL850 Digital Control of power Electronics and Drive ELL854 Selected Topics in Electrical Machines
Systems 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Recent developments in the area of electrical machines.
Review of Digital signal processors, Laplace transforms, Theory
ELp854 Electrical Machines CAD Laboratory
of sampling, z-transformations, sampling techniques, Digital PWM
3 Credits (0-1-4)
generation schemes, Realization of different PWM’s using DSP’s,
Control of DC-DC Converters, Inverters, DC and Ac Machines. Computer aided design of electrical machines.
192

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Electrical Engineering
ELL855 High power Converters ELD872 Major project part-II
3 Credits (3-0-0) 12 Credits (0-0-24)
Introduction to High Power devices – IGBT, Thyristor, IGCT. Different To be decided by the project supervisor.
topologies of high power converters – Voltage Source and current
source converter, 2- level converters, 3 level NPC converter, Cascaded ELL872 Selected Topics in power System
H-Bridge Multilevel Converters, Modular multilevel converters. Pulse 3 Credits (3-0-0)
width modulation techniques for high power converters – Level To be decided by the Instructor when floating this course: It can be
shifted PWM, Phase shifted PWM, Space vector PWM for multilevel anything that is related to power system, but is not covered in any
converters. Design of high power converter components, operational of the established courses.
issues, fault tolerant operat.ion, reliability, mechanical design. Design
of filters for high power converters. Relevant IEEE and IEC standards ELL873 power System Transient
for high power converters. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Origin and nature of transients and surges. Lumped and distributed
ELp855 Smart-Grids Laboratory
circuit representations. Line energisation and de-energisation
3 Credits (0-1-4)
transients, current chopping, short-line faults, trapped charge effects,
Experiments related to smart-grids measurement and control. effect of source, control of transients, Lightening, effect of tower
footing resistance, travelling waves, insulation coordination, circuit
ELL856 Advanced Topics in power Electronics
breakers duty, surge arresters, overvoltage limiting devices.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL874 power System Reliability
Upcoming power electronic devices- SiC and GaN devices. Design of
power electronic converters, Introduction to soft-switching in dc-dc 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and dc-ac applications. Review of basic probability theory, reliability theory, network modeling
and evaluation of simple and complex systems, generation system
ELL857 Selected Topics in power Electronics
reliability – concept of loss of load probability, energy not served,
3 Credits (3-0-0) transmission system reliability, component failure, distribution system
Recent developments in power electronics. reliability with perfect and imperfect switching.
ELL858 Advanced Topics in Electric Drives ELD880 Major project part-I
3 Credits (3-0-0) 6 Credits (0-0-12)
Advanced PWM Techniques. Control of switched reluctance motor drives.
ELL880 Special Topics in Computers-I
Control of slip-ring induction motor drives. Self-commissioning and
self-adaptation techniques in drives. Sensor-less techniques in drives. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fault tolerant controllers and converters. Other recent topics on drives.
ELS880 Independent Study
ELL859 Selected Topics in Electric Drives 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELD881 Major project part-II
Recent developments in the area of electric drives.
12 Credits (0-0-24)
ELD870 Minor project-I
ELL881 Special Topics in Computers-II
3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
To be decided by the project supervisor
ELL882 Large-Scale Machine Learning
ELL870 Restructured power System
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction, Randomized Algorithms, Matrix Approximations
Philosophy of market models, Concepts in micro-economics, Centralized
(low-rank approximation, decomposition, sparse matrices, matrix
and de-centralized Dispatch Philosophies, Congestion Management,
completion), Large Scale Optimization, Kernel Methods (fast training),
Ancillary Service Management, Transmission Pricing Methods, Loss
Boosted Decision trees, Dimensionality Reduction (linear and
Allocation Algorithms, Locational Marginal Price (LMP) calculation
nonlinear methods), Distributed Gibbs Sampling, Sparse Methods/
and properties, Financial Transmission Rights (FTRs), Transmission
Streaming (sparse coding...); Applications.
Expansion Planning, Market Power, Working of International
Power Markets, Restructuring Issues in Indian Power Sector.
ELL883 Embedded Intelligence
ELp870 power System Lab-I 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-1-4) Basics of embedded, learning, and adaptive systems; sensors, nature
of dynamic environments, hardware aspects.
Power flow studies, fault studies, state estimation, security analysis,
robust power flow methods, power flow with uncertain data.
ELL884 Deep Learning for Natural Language processing
ELD871 Major project part-I 3 Credits (3-0-0)
6 Credits (0-0-12) Pre-requisite(s): ELL409/ ELL784/ COL774
To be decided by the project supervisor. Overlaps with: COL772
Introduction to classical NLP, tokenization, N-gram language models
ELL871 Distribution System Operation and planning
and their evaluation, POS tagging (HMM, Viterbi, MEMM), Parsing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
(CKY parser), lexical and distributional semantics, introduction to
Structure of distribution system, modeling of system components, deep learning (ANN, backpropagation, activation functions, RNNs,
power flow, fault studies, state estimation, optimal power flow, optimal CNNs), RNN based language models, sequence-to-sequence models,
feeder reconfiguration, optimum resources planning, incorporation attention and self-attention, transformer, advanced transformer
of DGs in operation and planning. architectures (BERT, RoBERTa, GPT), prompt-based learning,
integrating knowledge in language models, retrieval-augmented
ELp871 power System Lab-II
models, editing neural networks, multilingual NLP, multimodal NLP,
3 Credits (0-1-4) other applications of NLP, ethics in NLP, LLM and creativity.
193

Electrical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
ELL885 Machine Learning for Computational Finance Diffusion models, Deep reinforcement learning, Applications of DL
3 Credits (3-0-0) in NLP, Vision and Graphs.
Time series forecasting techniques, Introduction to Portfolio theory, ELL892 Internet Technologies
Trading Systems, Optimisation methods, Risk Management, Machine
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Learning for Algorithmic Trading.
Web and service oriented architectures, dynamic web site
ELL886 Big Data Systems programming (client side and server side), web application
development, web based repositories, UI design, XML, Web 2.0 and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
the semantic web, applications.
Introduction; Hadoop, Map-Reduce, GFS/HDFS, Bigtable/HBASE;
Extension of Map-Reduce: iMap-reduce (iterative), incremental map- ELL893 Cyber-physical Systems
reduce. SQL and Data-parallel programming, DryadLINQ. Data-flow 3 Credits (3-0-0)
parallelism vs. message passing. Data locality. Memory hierarchies.
Introduction: core principles behind CPSs; Specification of CPS, CPS
Sequential versus random access to secondary storage. NoSQL
models: Continuous, Discrete, Hybrid, Compositional; Abstraction
systems. NewSQL systems. Finding similar items and LSH; Search
and System Architecture, Design by Invariants, Sensing and Fusion, Cloud
Technology: link analysis and Page-rank algorithm; Large Scale Graph
of Robots/CPS; Case Studies: Healthcare, Smart Grid, Transportation.
Processing; Mining Streaming Data and Realtime analytics: Window
semantics and window joins. Sampling and approximating aggregates ELL894 Network performance Modeling and Analysis
(no joins). Querying histograms. Maintaining histograms of streams.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Use of Haar wavelets. Incremental and online query processing:
Network performance models and classifications, Hidden Markov
online aggregation.
Models (HMM), Delay and throughput analysis using Markov models,
ELL887 Cloud Computing Performance analysis with multi-class traffic, Renewal theory and
regenerative processes, Performance analysis with semi-Markov traffic
3 Credits (3-0-0)
characteristics, Network performance analysis with interactive servers,
Introduction; Example System: Apple iCloud, Amazon-AWS;
Practical network traffic characterization, Network performance
Fundamental Concepts: Cloud Characteristics, Cloud delivery models;
stability, Introduction to dynamic programming, Example network
Cloud Enabling Technology: broad-band network,virtualisation
modeling scenarios in various engineering applications.
technology; Cloud Infrastructure Mechanisms: Logical Network
Perimeter, Virtual Server, Cloud Storage Devices;Cloud Architecture: ELD895 MS Research project
Workload Distribution Architecture, Resource Pooling Architecture, 36 Credits (0-0-72)
Dynamic Scalability Architecture, Hypervisor Clustering Architecture,
Load Balanced Virtual Server Instances Architecture, Elastic Resource ELL895 Network Security
Capacity Architecture, Elastic Disk Provisioning Architecture,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Redundant Storage Architecture; Cloud Security: Encryption, Identity
Introduction to cryptography, public key distribution and user
and Access management, Cloud-based Security Groups; Working
authentication, TLS and wireless network security, secure email
with Cloud: Building Service Platforms, Cost Metrics, Pricing Models.
and PGP, IP security, system security - intrusion, malicious software
ELL888 Advanced Machine Learning and firewalls.
3 Credits (3-0-0) ELL896 Mobile Computing
Advanced topics in machine learning, including Nonlinear Dimension 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Reduction, Maximum Entropy, Exponential Family Models, Graphical
Overview of mobile computing; introduction to GSM, 3GPP, 4G LTE, LTE-A
Models; Computational Learning Theory, Structured Support Vector
standards; wireless networking protocols: mobile IP, ad hoc networks,
Machines, Feature Selection, Kernel Selection, Meta-Learning, Multi-
wireless TCP; cognitive radio networks; data broadcasting; location
Task Learning, Semi-Supervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning,
and context awareness; QoS, QoE; disconnected or weakly connected
Approximate Inference, Clustering, and Boosting.
operations; protocol and resource optimization; wireless security issues.
ELL889 protocol Engineering
ELL897 Network Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Principles, stages, specification formalisms (UML, SDL, ASN.1) of
Activities, methods, operational procedures, tools, communications
telecom protocol design, protocol software development process,
interfaces, protocols, and human resources that pertain to the
computer aided protocol engineering, verification and testing of
operation, administration, maintenance, and provisioning of
protocols, object oriented techniques in protocol development, kernel
communications networks, network management standards,
level development and programming of protocols.
technologies; functional areas of fault management, configuration
management, accounting management, performance management,
ELL890 Computational Neuroscience
and security management, major Internet and telecommunications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
standards for network management: SNMPv3, RMON, CMIP and TMN.
Fundamentals of brain anatomy and physiology, signals of brain, Brain
signal recording and imaging techniques, Human experimentation ELL898 pervasive Computing
study design, Processing the X-D neural 2.5data, Machine learning 3 Credits (3-0-0)
approaches, Graph theory and neural networks, Multivariate pattern
Introduction, computer and network architectures for pervasive
analysis in 4D Imaging data, Statistical inferences, student projects
computing, mobile computing mechanisms, human-computer
and presentations.
interaction using speech and vision, pervasive software systems,
location mechanisms, practical techniques for security and user-
ELL891 Advances in Deep Learning
authentication, and experimental pervasive computing systems.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL409/ ELL784/ COL774 (B.Tech./M.Tech.) ELL899 Testing and Fault Tolerance
Supervised learning, Shallow neural networks, Deep neural networks, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Loss functions, Training models, Gradients and initialization, Introduction to testing, simulation, fault simulation, automatic
Measuring performance, Regularization, Convolutional networks, test pattern generator, sequential logic bests, automatic test
Residual networks, Transformers, Unsupervised learning, Generative equipment, design for testability, Built-In-Self-Test (BIST),
adversarial networks, Normalising flows, Variational Auto-encoders, behavioral test and verification.
194

Department of Energy Science and Engineering
ESL100 Energy Resources and Utilization ESp260 Electrical Energy Laboratory
4 Credits (3-1-0) 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL380, ESL714, ESL734, Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESP713, ESP705
ESL875, PHY302 Characteristics of different electrical machines, Power system
Conventional and non-conventional energy resources and their protection, Power system transmission and distribution, Basics of
potential, Introduction of conventional fuels (Coal, oil, natural gas), closed loop control, Power electronic converters and their applications.
Fuels (solid, liquid, gas): characterization (Ultimate, Proximate
analysis, etc.), gasification, combustion, utilization of conventional ESL261 Analog and Digital Electronics
fuels in combustion engines (Steam, Gas turbines, IC engines) and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
fuel cell, Nuclear energy: fuel resources, nuclear reactor, and their
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL201, ELL304
environmental impact; Renewable energy (Solar, wind, biomass, hydro
energy, geothermal, OTEC, tidal, etc.), resource assessment and their Pre-requisite(s): ELL100
potential, biomass characterization, utilization of renewable energy and Working of BJT and MOSFET, biasing schemes, single stage amplifier,
bio-energy for heat and power generation, and environmental impact. frequency compensation, current mirrors, multistage amplifiers;
differential and operational amplifiers, negative and positive feedback,
ESL200 Fundamentals of Energy Engineering
applications of operational amplifiers (integrator, differentiator, adder,
5 Credits (3-1-2) subtractor, power amplifier, zero-crossing detectors, filter circuits,
oscillators), Logic Gates, Number systems, arithmetic operations,
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL340, ESL360, ESL740,
K-maps, multiplexers, de-multiplexers, decoders, ROMs, latches,
ESL753, ESL755, ESL768
flip-flops, registers, counters, asynchronous, synchronous counters,
Introduction to various energy resources and technology development.
memories, switch level implementation of logic families.
Energy consumption pattern in different sectors (Industries,
commercial and residential buildings, agriculture, service industries,
ESL262 Electrical Machines
etc.), Power generation using steam turbine power plant, gas
turbine power plant, internal combustion engines and fuel cell and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
associated limitations, challenges and environmental effects. Various Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL401, ELL756
unconventional and renew-able energy sources and technologies
Pre-requisite(s): ELL100, ESL260
such as nuclear power plants, solar power plants (Photovoltaic and
Thermal), hydro power plant, wind power plant, bioenergy and power Working of different machines including single phase and three
generation, wave and tidal power, etc. Fundamental and applied phase transformers, DC generators, DC motors, single phase and
concepts of energy for strengthening of sustainable energy and three phase induction machines, synchronous machines, Permanent
environment, thermal and electrical utilities, energy flow and Sankey Magnet Ma-chines, Linear Induction Machine (LIM), Brushless DC
diagram, measures of energy efficiency improvements, demand and Machine, Switched Reluctance Machine, Stepper motors and other
supply analysis, life cycle assessment, and emerging issues in the small machines. The course also provides in-depth knowledge and
built environment. understanding of various machine characteristics, different control
techniques, various tests associated with them.
ESL220 Semiconductors for Energy System
ESL263 power Electronics and Drives for Energy
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Engineering
Overlaps with: Some overlap with PYL102, PYL306, PYL312,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
PYL125
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL231, ELL302, ELL332
Classical and quantum statistics, Fundamentals of semiconducting
materials, Doping and PN-junction formation, Optical absorption Pre-requisite(s): ELL100, ESL260
processes in semiconductors, Understanding of carrier depletion Basics of power electronics, different types of converters, various
region, Minority- and the majority- charge carriers, Drift and diffusion factors for selecting Power Electronic devices for different applications,
of charge carriers, Construction of metal-semiconductor and semi- various Types of Fully Con-trolled switches, analysis and applications
conductor-semiconductor energy-band diagrams. Ohmic and Schottky of rectifiers and inverters, analysis of DC-DC converters, control
barriers for charge carriers, Current-voltage characteristics under and modulation techniques, Overview of various types of electrical
the voltage-bias and light-bias conditions, PN-junction breakdown drives, types of loads, DC drives. Mathematical modeling and analysis
mechanisms. Homo- and Hetero-junctions, Basic charge carrier of steady state characteristics as well as choice and dimensioning
transport equations for semi-conductor device operation. Capacitance- of current- and speed-controllers, most commonly used AC drives;
voltage and Impedance analysis of semi-conductor devices. Induction motor drives, Permanent magnet synchronous motor
Optoelectronic Devices: Solar cells, Photodiode, Light emitting diodes. drives and synchronous motor drives, Converter topologies and
control principles used in modern electrical drives, power electronics
ESL260 Network Analysis
applications to special machines.
3 Credits (2-1-0)
ESL280 Introduction to plasma Concepts
Overlaps with: ELL202
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL744, ESL870, ESL871,
Circuits, types, properties and models. Circuit modeling methods.
Steady state / transition processes and equivalent models of circuit PYL305
elements. Types of circuit responses. Time-domain response: Plasma in Daily Life, Plasma concepts: Introduction, Debye Screening,
calculating step and impulse responses of circuits containing resistors, Plasma oscillation, Plasma particle phenomena, Equivalent Circuit
inductors and capacitors. Time-domain analysis of first (RC and RL) Model, Concept of plasma potentials and its importance in design
and second order (RLC) circuits. Resonance in RLC circuits. Inductive of plasma sources, Pre-sheath, Plasma sheath-Wall interaction, low
(magnetic) coupling. Mutual inductance. Series and parallel resonant pressure and atmospheric pressure plasmas, thermal and non-thermal
RLC circuits. Two magnetically coupled RLC circuits. Computation of plasmas with examples, Different Types of Plasma Sources (DC /
circuit response to arbitrary input signals – convolution. Convolution RF / microwave / ECR / helicon / surface wave), Plasma as Fluids,
properties. The forward and inverse Laplace transforms. S-domain Wave Propagation in Plasmas, Basic Plasma diagnostics, Plasma
circuit analysis. Study subject structure Two-port networks: Fusion Energy, Plasma in space propulsion, Plasma based materials
impedance and admittance matrices, two-port network connections, processing, Plasmas for waste management, Plasma for Environment,
reciprocity and symmetry. Plasma medicine.
195

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
ESL300 Self-Organizing Dynamical Systems diagram, Head, Power, Efficiency Dimensional analysis and similarity,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Specific-speed, Hill curves; Pelton Turbine: working principle, velocity
triangles, nozzle and flow regulating mechanism, jet deflector,
Pre-requisite(s): EC60 (for UG students) braking, power and efficiency; Francis and Kaplan Turbines, working
Dynamical systems dissipative and area preserving, Patterns in principles, degree of reaction, velocity triangles, power and efficiency,
Hamiltonian dynamics invariants and symmetry, KAM theorem / regulation; draft tube; Performance characteristics of turbines;
coherent structures, complexity and pattern formation, Belousov – Hydro-kinematic turbines, Pump as turbine; Centrifugal and axial flow
Zhabutinsky reaction, Landau-Ginzburg / mean-field models, scaling pumps, head-flow rate, specific speed, power, efficiency, operating
fractals, Cellular automata, Wavelet transforms, Phase transitions and point for different pump systems, cavitation in pumps and turbines;
order parameter, Criticality the border of order and chaos, Entropy Hydrodynamic transmissions.
and direction of time, Negentropic systems, Self-organized criticality,
lattice models, Examples: Electrical circuits, Management systems, ESL340 Non-Conventional Source of Energy
Astrophysical systems, Plasma and magnetic surface systems, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Biological systems, Non-linear systems.
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL740
ESp300 Energy Innovation Laboratory Pre-requisite(s): EC60 (for UG students)
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Global & National energy scenarios, Forms & characteristics of
renewable energy sources, Solar radiation, Flat plate collectors, Solar
Pre-requisite(s): ESP260, ESL280
concentrators, Thermal Applications of solar energy, Photovoltaics
Students will be doing innovative projects relevant to energy technology and applications, Energy storage, Energy from biomass,
engineering based on their interest. Based on the Student interest, Thermochemical, Biochemical conversion to fuels, biogas and its
they will be assigned to perform energy related design projects/ applications, Wind characteristics, Resource assessment, Horizontal &
experiments. vertical axis wind turbines, Electricity generation and water pumping,
Micro/Mini hydropower systems, Water pumping and conversion to
ESQ311 Battery Storage
electricity, Hydraulic ram pump, Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
This seminar course comprises the information related to various (OTEC), Geothermal, Tidal and Wave energies, Material aspects of
batteries and their applications, · including electric vehicles, grid Renewable energy technologies and systems.
storage, consumer applications, defence applications, etc. Importance
of batteries to effectively harness renewable and non-energy. ESL341 Energy Storage
Batteries and their performance matrix, thermal impact on different 3 Credits (3-0-0)
types of batteries, importance of self-discharge in stationary storage
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL772, ESL773, ESL880
batteries, high-energy and high-power batteries. The next generation
Pb-acid batteries, advanced Li-ion batteries, alkali-metal batteries, Sensible thermal energy storage, Latent energy storage, Thermal
alkali-earth-metal batteries. ZERO-emission batteries, sea-water management system design using Latent thermal energy storage,
batteries, dual-ion batteries, dual-graphite batteries, thin-film/solid- Thermochemical heat storage system, Hydrogen energy and chemical
state batteries. energy storage and production, Battery electrical energy storage
systems, Pumped storage systems, Other electrical energy storage
ESL320 Building Integrated photovoltaics systems, Compressed air storage, Flywheels, Superconducting
Magnetic energy storage, Integration of energy storage systems,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
energy storage system optimization.
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL360, ESL755, ESL852
ESL342 Nanotechnology in Energy Conversion and
Introduction to PV technology, Building envelope as a support for PV,
PV issues for building designers, Location constraints, Effect of tilt Storage
and orientation, Design guidelines for the integration of PV modules 3 Credits (3-0-0)
for Shading systems, Rainscreen systems, Stick system curtain walls,
Overlaps with: Some overlap with PYL705, CRL725, CLL723
Unitised curtain wall, Double-skin facades, Atria and canopies, PV
Introduction to nanotechnology, various nanostructures Quantum
integration opportunities, Specific issues of BIPV in the residential
dots, nanocrystalline thin films and nano-particles, Semiconductor
sector and refurbishment applications, Apartment blocks, Low-rise
nanostructure based electronic and optical properties, fabrication
traditional houses, PV maintenance, Various case studies.
methodology (Arc discharge, RF-plasma, Plasma arc technique, Ion
ESL330 Energy, Ecology & Environment sputtering, Laser ablation, Laser pyrolysis, Ball Milling, Molecular beam
epitaxy, Chemical vapour deposition method and Electro deposition),
4 Credits (3-1-0)
nanolithography, characterization techniques technologies for direct
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL710 energy conversion, nanostructures (quantum dots, nano tubes,
nano rods) for Anti reflection, plasmonics and light scattering) in p-n
Pre-requisite(s): EC60 (for UG students)
junction and Excitonic solar cells, Nanomaterials for Solar Thermal
Concepts of ecosystems and environment, Characteristics and types of
Energy, Nanomaterials in Energy Storage Devices. Thermal Transport
ecosystems, Autecology and synecology, Energy flow in ecosystems,
in Solid Micro/Nanostructures, Size Effects, Quantum Conductance,
Feedback loops, Trophic webs, Eco-technology and Eco-development,
Tunneling, Non-equilibrium Heat Conduction, and Nanoscale Thermal
Energy-environment interaction, Impact of energy sources (coal, oil,
Radiation and Radiative Properties of Nanomaterials, Radiation
natural gas, solar, wind, biomass, hydro, geothermal, tidal, wave,
Temperature and Entropy, Surface Electromagnetic Waves, and
ocean thermal and nuclear) on environment, local regional and global
Near-Field Radiation for energy conversion devices and storage
implications, Approaches to mitigate environmental emissions from
mechanisms, Nano-enhanced phase change materials.
energy sector, Global initiatives Kyoto Protocol, Clean development
mechanism, Case studies. ESL350 Energy Conservation and Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL331 Hydrodynamic Machines
Overlaps with: ESL720
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC60 (for UG students)
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL768, CVL482
Thermodynamic basis of energy conservation, Irreversible processes,
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 Reversibility and Availability, Exergy and available energy, Energy
Basic fluid mechanics of turbo-machinery, momentum and the head- conservation in HVAC systems and thermal power plants, Solar
momentum equations, Classification of Hydrodynamic machines, systems, Second law efficiency and LAW, Heat pumps and Heat
Theory of turbo machinery, Euler's theorem, Velocity and pressure pipes for space conditioning, Heat recovery and Heat exchangers,
196

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
Furnaces and cooling towers, Energy conservation in buildings, Basics of generation, transmission and distribution system, per unit
U-Value of walls / roof, Ventilation systems - Fan and ducts Lighting system, modeling of various types generators and loads, overhead and
Systems – Different light sources and luminous efficacy, Insulation underground transmission, transmission line models, basic protection
use – Materials properties, Optimum thickness, Thermo economic system for power system, overcurrent, distance, generator protection
analysis, Energy conservation in electrical devices and systems, schemes etc., power flow analysis for transmission, basic distribution
Economic evaluation of energy conservation measures, Electric motors structure, three phase modeling of transformers, distribution lines,
and transformers, Inverters and UPS, Voltages stabilizers, Energy loads etc., three phase distribution system, power system analysis,
audit and Instrumentation. operation and control in smart grid environment.
ESL351 Fundamentals of Internal Combustion Engines ESL370 Control Systems and Automation
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL711, ESL714, MCL343, Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL225, MCL212, CLL261
MCL345, MCL812 Pre-requisite(s): ELL100, ESL260
Introduction to internal combustion (IC) engines; internal combustion Measuring instruments, polyphase metering, potentiometers,
engine classifications; Fuel quality for internal combustion engines electronic instruments, oscilloscopes, signal generation and signal
IC engine design and operating parameters; Fuel induction and analysis, control system and their representation, mathematical
injection techniques, Speed-torque characteristics, speed-power modeling of physical system, time response analysis of first order and
characteristics, the effect of design and operating parameters on second order system, stability, root locus, nyquist plots, bode plots,
power output, brake mean effective pressure and toque, break controllers, state variable analysis, controller design.
thermal efficiency, indicated thermal efficiency etc. supercharger,
Laplace transform and its role in control systems; pressure/
turbocharger, Pressure-crank history, ignition delay, flame speed,
temperature/flow transducers and actuators; types and mechanisms
heat release rate, cumulative heat release rate, Engine friction,
of valves; applications of valves; mechanical Cams & governors and
oxides of nitrogen oxides, Carbon monoxide, Unburned hydrocarbon,
their application in fuel-air injection control in IC engines, vibration
Particulate matter, Greenhouse gases, Formation mechanism and
control using spring-mass-damper system, rotational motion control
control measures of the engine-out emissions, Zero emission and
using gears, Computer Numerical Control (CNC) based machining,
hybrid engine, Emission norms.
forecasting for predictive control.
ESL352 Hydrogen Economy
ESL371 Design of Energy Systems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Overlaps with: Some overlap with CLL723, ESL746
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL743
Hydrogen potential and role in decarbonizing the global Energy
System; Hydrogen Characteristics, Forecast / Resource Assessment Pre-requisite(s): MCL140, APL106 or APL105, ESL200, ESL262,
of Hydrogen demand and supply; Impact of Hydrogen on economy ESL263
and environment, Different Pathways for Implementation of Introduction to design of energy system: Scope and formulation of the
Hydrogen economy; Grey, blue and green hydrogen; Aggregated and system de-sign, basic steps in design process; features of modeling,
Disaggregated models for GDP with Hydrogen and GHG Emissions. material selection, modeling of energy systems; Product vs Process
Technology for Hydrogen production from Conventional and De-sign, Basic design life cycle: Problem definition with basic design
Renewable Energy Re-sources (Coal, Natural Gas, Biomass, Solar considerations of various energy systems; Energy Systems Product
energy, Wind Energy, Nuclear energy); Hydrogen Storage (Gaseous, Design Virtual product design; Laboratory scale development, proto-
Cryogenic, Slush, Metal hydrides); Hydrogen Transportation (Gas type/pilot scale product development, actual/commercial product
grid (Pipeline network), gas tubular, liquid containers and hydrides); development; Ef-fect of various operating parameters on structural
Application of Hydrogen in Fuel Cells and IC Engines for Transportation design; Stresses in thin cylindrical shell due to internal pressure
sectors (Automotive vehicles, Passenger Trains, Locomotives, Flights, circum-ferential and longitudinal stresses and de-formation in thin
Ships) and Industrial sectors (Ammonia industry, Fertilizer industry, and thick cylinders – spherical shells subjected to internal pres-sure
Oil Refineries etc.); Role of Carbon Capture Storage/Sequestration –Deformation in spherical shells – Lame’s theorem
in Hydro-gen production from fossil fuels Design codes- Indian Boiler Regulations (IBR), BIS, ASME standards,
Life Cycle Assessment of Hydrogen energy (Production to Utilization Data Book Utilization, analysis tools (Software),
and Disposal); Analysis of Specific Energy Input to Hydrogen Conventional power generation design aspects: Pumps, boiler,
production from different feed-stock/resources, Well to wheel condenser, feedwater heaters, draught, reservoir design, pen-stock,
efficiency; Techno-Economic Analysis, Levelized Cost of Energy headrace tunnel, tailrace tunnel, power block,
(LCOE), Average Transportation Cost Nuclear reactors: Reactor core, first wall, blanket, reflector, thermal
Hydrogen safety- Codes and Standards, Hydrogen fuel quality and radiation shields, coolant, control rods; Radiation protection and
norms, Emission Norms; Infrastructure development for supply-chain disaster management aspects;
Hydrogen systems; Hydrogen Energy Policy and Programs. Non-conventional power generation design aspects: Solar thermal,
Solar PV, Bio-mass, small hydro, wind, fuel cell inverters, biomass
ESL360 Direct Energy Conversion Methods gasifier.
4 Credits (3-1-0) Electrical design aspects of energy systems: Conventional power
generation system: Transformer and generator auxiliary power
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL730 consumption, battery system, Distributed Generation systems, basics
Energy classification, Sources and utilization, Principle of energy of distributed system design.
conversion, Indirect / direct energy conversion, Basic principles of Non-conventional power generation systems: cabling power
design and operations of (i) Thermoelectric (ii) Thermionic convertors evacuation.
(iii) Photovoltaic energy systems (iv) Fuel cells (v) Plasma diodes (vi)
Magneto hydrodynamic Power generators and (vii) Advanced energy ESL372 Intelligent Techniques for Energy System
conversion systems. Analysis
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL361 power Systems and Smart Grid Operations
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL784, COL303, COL770,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL789
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ELL303, ELL363
Basic probability theory, probability density functions, types of
Pre-requisite(s): ELL100 distribution, uncertainty analysis, expert systems, regression
197

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
methods, classification methods, descriptive data analysis, artificial ESL377 Optimization of Energy Systems
neural networks, anomaly/outlier detection, soft computing methods, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
IoT. information flow diagrams, Lagrange multipliers, Search
methods, Dynamic programming, Geometric programming, Linear Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL743, CLL782, CLL784,
programming, modeling of energy systems, Steady-state simulation CLL785, MTL103
and dynamic behavior analysis of large energy systems like heat Engineering design and optimization definitions, Trends analysis
exchangers, power plants, components optimization for maximum of multiple physical parameters involving in energy systems,
efficiency, energy system optimization. Mathematical model for optimal energy system design, Representative
methods for the solution of the optimization problem, Optimization
ESL373 Computational Methods for Energy Systems techniques- curve fitting, Lagrange multipliers, Search methods,
4 Credits (3-0-2) Modelling of energy systems, Steady-state and transient simulation
for optimization of energy systems, Components optimization for
Pre-requisite(s): MCL141/MCL142 or MCL140 & MCL242 or
maximum efficiency, case studies.
CLL121, CLL231 & CLL251
Importance of computational analysis in energy sector; basics of
ESL380 Basics of Nuclear Fission and Fusion
different methods in computational analysis; introduction to the
4 Credits (3-1-0)
governing equations, partial differential equations and ordinary
differential equations; computational workflow: model development, Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL734, PYL302, PYL569
solver and post processors; different computational techniques Introduction and basic concepts (Atomic structure, Avagadro’s
used for computational analysis; validation and verification of number, isotopes, isotones and isobars, Binding energy, Einstein’s
computational results; Optimization of the processes by varying mass-energy relation, radio activity and radioactive decay, cross-
de-sign and operating parameters of energy systems, analysis of section, differential cross-section and reaction rates), Nuclear
the computed results at different time scales; sources and types structure (Nuclear mass, Nuclear shell model, Single-Particle features,
of error in the computational analysis; interpolation, approximation Collective states), Nuclear instability (alpha, beta and gamma decay),
and convergence; methods of Finite element analysis: stiffness Nuclear Reactions (Energy spectra, Angular distributions, electron
method, potential energy and Rayleigh-Ritz method, Galerkin, FE scattering nuclear scattering, direct reactions, compound nucleus
formulation, element formulation, and coordinate transformation, reactions, heavy-ion reactions), Interaction of radiation and matter
isoparametric formulation; Applications: problems of structural (Heavy charged particles, electron, gamma-rays and neutrons),
mechanics; associated flowcharts; Recent advances in computational Detectors and instrumentation (Gas detectors, Scintillation detectors,
methods: moving mesh, adaptive mesh refinement, high performance semiconductor detectors, neutron detectors), Biological effects of
computing, coupling with machine learning; Applications of radiation (Direct-Indirect physical/chemical damage, dose/dose
computational analysis in energy sector problems (case study). rate/dose distribution, damage to critical tissue, human exposure to
radiation and risk assessment), Industrial and analytical applications
ESL374 Smart Devices for Energy Harvesting (Industrial uses such as tracing, gauging, material modification,
3 Credits (3-0-0) sterilization and food preservation, neutron activation analysis,
particle induced X-ray emission, acceleration mass spectrometry),
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL730, MCL730, PYL102,
Nuclear medicine (Projection imaging, computed tomography
PYL651, CRL726
[CT] positron emission tomography, magnetic resonance imaging
Ambient Energy Sources: Mechanical, Light, and Thermal, Energy [MRI] and radiation therapy), Nuclear safety (Risk assessment
harvesting technologies, Fundamentals of ferroelectric materials and and monitoring, radioactive waste disposal methodology, Disaster
energy harvesting, Piezoelectric materials and energy harvesting, management aspects), Power from Fission (Fission products and
parametric identification and measurement techniques of piezoelectric characteristics, thermal fission reactor, breeder reactor, Finite reactor,
devices, Pyroelectric materials and devices, Introduction to the Reactor operation, Commercial thermal reactor [Early gas-cooled
triboelectric materials and devices, Working principle of triboelectric reactor. Advanced gas-cooled reactor (AGR), Pressurized water
nanogenerator, Self-powered triboelectric devices, Smart functional reactor (PWR), Boiling water reactor (BWR), Heavy water reactor
devices to harvest waste energy (HWR) and recent advances]), Thermonuclear fusion (Scope of fusion
for future, Q-values, reaction rates, Fusion Ignition, requirement of
ESL375 IoT for Energy Systems plasma, Reactors [Magnetic Confinement Fusion {MCF} and Inertial
3 Credits (3-0-0) confinement fusion {ICF}], Current Status).
Internet of things is becoming integral part in various energy sector
application. This course would introduce students with the concepts ESL381 plasma Science
related to architecture of internet of things (IoT), security protocols, 4 Credits (3-1-0)
IoT for smart grids, microgrids, and building energy management
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL737, PYL658
systems, water management system etc. IoT for various energy
device level applications, data analytics and cloud computing for Fundamentals: Definition of plasma, Plasma criteria and Debye
IoT applications. shielding; Particle motion concepts: single particle motion of charged
particles in constant, time-varying and spatial varying electromagnetic
ESL376 Smart Buildings fields, first second and third adiabatic invariants; Fluid model of
plasma: dielectric description of cold plasma, Hot plasma dielectric
3 Credits (3-0-0)
tensor, various types of electro-static and electromagnetic waves
Pre-requisite(s): ELL100 in the cold plasma model, magneto-hydrodynamic description of
Introduction to the building energy consumptions and future plasmas, CMA diagram; Plasma diffusion: Ambipolar diffusion,
predictions, steps to conduct the surveys of the existing buildings diffusion in weakly-ionized, fully-ionized and magnetized plasmas,
to determine the energy consumption patterns, various areas of time-dependent and time independent solutions of diffusion equations
interventions, controllers for light, HVAC and other motor based loads, and plasma resistivity, neoclassical diffusion and banana diffusion
thermal management of the buildings by the use of phase change regimes; Equilibrium and stability: hydrodynamic equilibrium, beta
materials, renewable energy based power generation in buildings concept, Instability classifications (two-stream, Rayleigh-Taylor,
for reduction of external power demand, demand response, optimal Universal and kinetic instabilities); kinetic description of plasma:
resource and load management for smart buildings. Application of governing equations, Landau damping, BGK and Van-Kampen modes,
IoT for smart buildings management system, effect of facade design Kortewegde Vries and nonlinear Schrödinger equations; nonlinear
in old and new buildings. Ancillary services, and concept of peer to sheath estimates (planar, Bohm and Child-Langmuir sheaths); nonlinear
peer sharing in buildings. Other aspects like thermal comfort, indoor plasma aspects: Pon-dermotive forces, Shock waves and double
air quality etc. for buildings. layers, parametric instabilities, echoes, re-connection, turbulence;
198

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
Special plasmas: atmospheric pressure plasmas, non-neutral industrial processes of photo-voltaic technologies: active electronic
plasmas, space plasmas, dusty plasmas, solid ultra-cold plasmas. materials cleaning process, pn-junction formation using various
techniques, metal contacts formation, lamination of solar panels for
ESL382 plasma Sources and Diagnostics
protection, wiring and testing of solar photovoltaic modules. Different
3 Credits (3-0-0) Technologies: First generation silicon photovoltaic technology. Thin
Films based photovoltaic technologies. Advanced silicon photovoltaic
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL737
technologies based on the Passivating emitter rear contacts (PERC),
Plasma Sources: Introductory concepts; Physics of high voltage
Tunnel oxide based passivating contacts (TOPCon), Interdigitated
sheaths; Particle and energy balance; Basic concepts of DC sources,
back contacts (IBC), and Silicon heterojunction (SHJ). Photovoltaic
RF sources (capacitively-coupled, inductively-coupled, helicon),
technologies related to space applications. Next generation
microwave sources, resonance heated sources (electron cyclotron,
photovoltaic technologies based on tandem solar cells to achieve
ion cyclotron etc.).
high power conversion efficiency.
Plasma Diagnostics: In-situ probes: Lang-muir probes, Capacitive
probes, E-probes and other particle analysers; Essential plasma ESL450 Hybrid Vehicles
spectroscopy measurements; Plasma imaging methods; Interferometry 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and reflectometry; Electromagnetic emission diagnostics; Underlying
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL780, MCL345
principle of other advanced optical diagnostics (Thomson scattering,
Laser Induced Fluorescence (LIF), Laser Photo Detachment (LPD)). Fundamentals of hybrid vehicles (internal combustion engines and
electrical system); Classification of Hybrid electric vehicles; the
ESL390 Energy Economics architecture of hybrid drive trains-Series, Parallel, Series-Parallel
3 Credits (3-0-0) hybrid; Design principles of HEVs; Basic components of Hybrid electric
systems; Design of HEV drivetrain: Series, parallel, series-parallel, mild
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL750, MCL760
and plug-in; Transmission mechanism: clutch, Gear-box, cam profiling;
Introduction to energy sector and considerations of access, security
Regenerative braking- Fundamentals and mechanism; Control system
and externality; Energy demand analysis, management and
for hybrid electric vehicles; Torque-speed characteristics of hybrid
forecasting, Economics of energy supply, Energy Markets – solid,
vehicles; Driving cycles for hybrid vehicles.
liquid, and gaseous fuels as well as electricity; Energy pricing;
Different types of Battery, specific power density, state of charge,
Economics and energy-environment interaction; Energy sector
range with respect to the speed of hybrid vehicles, Fuel economy
reforms, Energy sector regulations.
improvement with alternative fuelled hybrid systems; Hydrogen
ESL400 Energy Efficiency fuelled hybrid vehicles; Energy efficiency and CO2 emission; Life cycle
analysis of hybrid electric vehicle (HEV).
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL350, ESL750, ESL724, ESL480 plasma Chemistry
ESL714, ESL715, ESL739, ESL753, ESL770, ESL790, ESL845, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
ELL766, ELL772
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL737
Introduction to energy efficiency of different sectors (Industries,
Basic concepts of plasma, Thermal and non-thermal plasma
agriculture, commercial and residential buildings, transportation,
chemistry, Elementary chemical reactions in plasmas, Various atomic
service industries, etc.), energy intensity, calculation of energy
and molecular collisions, Collision cross section, frequency and
efficiency of individual subsystem and whole system, energy
rate constant, Plasma sheath and potential; Chemical equilibrium
auditing, energy conservation, measures of energy efficiency,
and kinetics; Enthalpy and Gibbs free energy; Surface processes-
carbon credit, energy efficiency vs Specific CO2 emission, energy
plasma wall interaction- Adsorption, desorption, sticking coefficient,
security, sustainability, demand side management, smart metering,
Chemical surface reactions, Surface diffusion. Ion bombardment;
energy efficiency schemes in various sectors- power plant, buildings,
Uniform density discharge model, Particle and energy balance,
appliances, electric vehicles, energy efficiency in building sector, etc.
Plasma diagnostics- Probe measurements, Emission and absorption
Scopes of efficiency enhancements in various devices such as boilers
spectroscopy, Applications of surface and volume plasma chemistry:
and furnaces, pumps and motors, lighting, etc. Energy Conservation
Plasma etching, Chemical vapour deposition, flue and exhaust gas
Act, standards, devices labelling, regulations such as ECBC, PAT, etc.
treatment, Excimer light source.
ESL410 Waste to Energy
ESL481 plasma based Technologies for Functional
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Materials
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL726, ESL732, ESL733,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL735, ESL778, MSL818
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL744, ESL737, MLL341,
Introduction: Waste as a renewable re-source, Environmental
PHL702
regulations, Clean air act; Global production of power from waste:
Waste management hierarchy, Waste handling and safety; Circular Introduction to plasmas; Plasma sources; DC plasmas, Capacitively
economy and zero waste; Waste as a resource: Waste classification and inductively coupled Plasma Sources; Micro wave and ECR Plasma
and composition, Assessment of energy content in waste; Waste Source; Magnetron Sputtering, Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapour
processing and its transportation; Waste to energy technologies: Deposition (PECVD); Plasma etching, PIII, Plasma processes for thin
Combustion technologies for traditional waste, Rotary combustors, films, Smart materials; Plasma process for Si based films, materials
Fluidized bed combustors, Incineration, Anaerobic digestion and land- for lithium ion batteries (LIB), thermoelectric films, Hydrogen storage
fill gas technologies, Refuse derived fuels through thermo-chemical materials, 2-D materials, superconductive films.
route, Gasification, Pyrolysis, Plasma gasification/pyrolysis, Syngas
ESL490 Wind and Tidal Wave Energy
utilization; Nuclear waste management; Waste to energy plants and
environment: Emission limits for waste combustion, Emission control 3 Credits (3-0-0)
technologies. Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL340, ESL740, CVL862,
ESL420 Industry Relevant photovoltaic Technologies ASL650, ASL826, APL402
3 Credits (3-0-0) Introduction to waves and tides, Ocean waves: formation,
characterisations, wave climate, energy content (Relations of ocean
Overlaps with: Some overlap with ESL360, ESL730, ESL755, currents and waves with the driving forces- wave dynamics), resources
ELL743 and measurement, energy absorption, mechanical energy conversion,
Brief introduction of solar photovoltaics science and engineering, rotating and linear generators. Wave power technologies: oscillating
Performance parameters of solar cells based on large area effect, Basic wave columns (OWC) and point-absorbers (PA). Basics of sloshing
199

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
dynamics (Fluid structure Interaction), Offshore structures – buoys, considerations, converter control characteristics, analysis of HVDC
mooring and anchoring design, tension leg platforms, umbilical link performance, Multi-terminal DC system, HVDC and FACTS.
cable etc., FLNG, System design aspects- Ocean Thermal Energy Distribution: Distribution systems, conductor size, Kelvin’s law,
Conversion (OTEC), tidal energy harnessing by basin design- performance calculations and analysis, Distribution inside and
sluice and estuary design. Marine energy harnessing technology, commercial buildings entrance terminology, Substation and feeder
Transmission lines, History, legal aspects, environmental assets, circuit design considerations, distribution automation, Futuristic
biological effects, conflicts of interest, availability and re-sources. power generation.
ESL710 Energy, Ecology and Environment ESL720 Energy Conservation
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Interrelationship between energy and environment, Sun as a source Introduction, Thermodynamics of energy conservation, Energy
of energy, nature of its radiation, Biological processes, photosynthesis, and exergy concepts, Irreversibility and second law analysis and
Autecology and Synecology, Population, Community Ecosystem efficiency of thermal systems such as mixing, throttling, drying and
(wetland, terrestrial, marine) Food chains, Ecosystem theories. solar thermal systems, Thermal power plant cycles. Refrigeration and
Sources of energy, Classification of energy sources, Environmental air conditioning cycles, thermal insulation in energy conservation,
issues related to harnessing to fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas), energy conservation through controls, electric energy conservation
geothermal, tidal, nuclear energy, solar, wind, hydropower, biomass, in building heating and lighting, energy efficient motors, Tariffs and
Energy flow and nutrient cycling in ecosystems, Environmental power factor improvement in electrical systems, Energy conservation
degradation, primary and secondary pollutants. Thermal/ radioactive in domestic appliances, transport, energy auditing, energy savings in
pollution, air and water pollution, Micro climatic effects of pollution, boilers and furnaces, energy conservation Act, Energy conservation
Pollution from stationary and mobile sources, Biological effects of in small scale domestic appliances and agriculture.
radiation, heat and radioactivity disposal, Acid rain, Global warming
and greenhouse gases, Ozone layer depletion. ESL721 pulse Width Modulation Techniques and AC
Motor Drives
ESL711 Fuel Technology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): For B.Tech. minimum 60* earned credits, no
Solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, Coal as a source of energy and
pre-requisite for PG
chemicals in India, Coal preparation and refining, Carbonization,
Gasification and liquefaction of coal and lignite, Principle of Course Contents: Introduction and review of power electronics
combustion, Petroleum and its derived products, Testing of liquid converters; need for PWM technique; low switching frequency PWM
fuels, Petroleum refining processes, Inter-conversion of fuels, techniques, Fourier analysis and waveform symmetries, current and
Natural gases and its derivatives, sources, potential, Gas hydrates, torque harmonics analyses, SHE and optimal PWM, pulse number and
Combustion appliances for solid, liquid and gaseous fuels, Introduction switching energy losses; carrier based PWM techniques, sine-triangle
to nuclear fuel, RDF, Bio-fuels, etc. PWM-, synchronisation, THI and bus-clamping PWM, current ripple
analysis; space vector based PWM techniques, CSV PWM, equivalence
ESL714 power plant Engineering with carrier based PWM, bus-clamping and advanced-bus-clamping
3 Credits (3-0-0) PWM techniques, stator flux, current and torque ripples analyses;
synchronised variable pulse number PWM schemes; vector control
Types of thermal power stations, Steam power stations based on fossil
of IM and PMSM drives.
fuels, Economy and thermal scheme of the steam power stations,
Thermal power plant equipment boilers, super heaters, super critical
ESL722 Integrated Energy Systems
steam generator, economizers, feed water heater, condensers,
combustion chamber and gas loop, turbines, cooling towers, etc. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Gas turbine power stations, Combined cycle power plants, Internal Pattern of fuel consumption: agricultural, domestic, industrial and
combustion engine plant for peak load, standby and start up, Elements community needs, Projection of energy demands, Substitution of
of hydropower and wind turbine, Elements of nuclear power plants, conventional sources by alternative sources and more efficient modern
Nuclear reactors and fuels. Recent advances in power plants (IGCC, technologies, Potential, availability as well as capacity of solar, wind,
super critical power plants, etc.). Case studies, Introduction to solar biogas, natural gas, forest produce, tidal, geothermal, mini-hydro and
power generation, Sterling engine, Decentralized power technologies. other modern applications, Hybrid and integrated energy systems,
Total energy concept and waste heat utilization, Energy modeling to
ESL715 Electrical Energy Management
optimize different systems.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL724 Energy Audit
Importance of energy management, Electrical energy auditing
methods, demand control, load scheduling/shifting, Energy 3 Credits (3-0-0)
management centres and their functions, Economic operation of Need for energy audit; Energy Conservation Act 2001 and other
power system, Unit commitment, Supervisory control and scada legislative frameworks; Types of energy audit; energy accounting and
systems, Optimal resource management in micro grid/decentralized analysis; Instrumentation and measurement techniques for energy
environment, Power factor improvement, Energy efficient motors, audit; Energy audit of buildings; HVAC audit; Energy audit of lighting
Pumps, Variable frequency drives, Energy efficient lighting, Energy and other electrical systems, motors, lifts, pumps, fans, and blowers;
conservation in various electrical devices. Energy audit of diesel or gas or alternative fuel based captive power
generation systems; Energy audit for gas turbine power plant, Energy
ESL718 power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
auditing of boilers, steam distribution systems, furnaces, stoves and
3 Credits (3-0-0) burners, compressed air networks, heat exchangers, cooling towers
Generation: Synchronous generator operation, Power angle etc.; Identification and assessment of energy saving opportunities;
characteristics and the infinite bus concept, dynamic analysis and Preparing energy audit reports.
modeling of synchronous machines, Excitations systems, Prime-mover
ESL726 Waste Heat Recovery
governing systems, Automatic generation control.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Auxiliaries: Power system stabilizer, Artificial intelligent controls,
Power quality. Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area)
AC Transmission: Overhead and cables, Transmission line equations, Introduction to Waste heat recovery, Classifications, Principles,
Regulation and transmission line losses, Reactive power compensation, Utilizations, Strategy of using waste heat recovery, Basic Heat
Flexible AC transmission. Exchanger Design Concepts, Heat Exchanger equipment classifications,
HVDC transmission: HVDC converters, advantages and economic Steam generation equipment, Power plant heat recovery systems,
200

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
Commercial waste heat recovery systems with detailed study of application to sustainable waste management, Classification of the
Recuperators, Radiation/Convective Hybrid Recuperator, Ceramic organic wastes based on incinerable, Land fillable and recyclable,
Regenerator, Introduction to efficient building design. Various technologies for segregation of organic matter from the
waste, Physico-chemical properties of organic matter, Various
ESL727 Energy and Environment
technologies for conversion from the organic waste to energy:
3 Credits (3-0-0) Thermo-chemical conversion (incineration, combustion, gasification
Introduction (Basic definitions, link with ecology, resource / plasma gasification, pyrolysis/plasma pyrolysis, and esterification),
classifications), Energy Transfer and Nutrient cycling, Environmental Bio-chemical conversion (anaerobic digestion, dark fermentation,
Impact of conventional resources, Alternate mitigation aspects microbial system). Conversion of energy/fuels derived from waste
using non-conventional resources, air pollution, water pollution, to electrical power: steam turbine power plant, Internal combustion
soil pollution, thermal pollution, e-waste pollution, radioactive engines, Microbial fuel cell, Solid oxide fuel cell, Technologies for
degradation, global effects and climate change. emission reduction for waste to energy systems, Future technologies
for zero effluent industrial parks, Government policies and norms
ESL729 Renewable Energy and Environment for waste to energy, and case studies /numerical problems for the
3 Credits (3-0-0) industries including sugar, cement and paper.
Current challenges in terms of environmental pollutions, Sources
ESL734 Nuclear Energy
of pollution and global warming, harmful effects of environmental
pollution, preventive measures and protocols to minimize environmental 3 Credits (3-0-0)
damage, availability and economic aspects of renewable energy Introduction: Scope of nuclear energy (fission and fusion energy),
sources, effects of renewable energy sources on the environment. typical reactions.
Basics Concepts: Binding Energy of a nuclear reaction, mass energy
ESL730 Direct Energy Conversion
equivalence and conservation laws, nuclear stability and radioactive
3 Credits (3-0-0) decay, radioactivity calculations.
Basic science of energy conversion, Indirect versus direct Interaction of Neutrons with Matter: Compound nucleus formation,
conversion, Physics of semiconductor junctions for photovoltaic and elastic and inelastic scattering, cross sections, energy loss in scattering
photoelectrochemical conversion of solar energy, Fabrication and collisions, polyenergetic neutrons, critical energy of fission, fission cross
evaluation of various solar cells in photovoltaic power generation sections, fission products, fission neutrons, energy released in fission,
systems, Technology and physics of thermo-electric generations, r-ray interaction with matter and energy deposition, fission fragments.
Thermoelectric materials and optimization studies, Basic concepts The Fission Reactor: The fission chain reaction, reactor fuels,
and design considerations of MHD generators, Cycle analysis of conversion and breeding, the nuclear power resources, nuclear power
MHD systems, Thermionic power conversion and plasma diodes, plant & its components, power reactors and current status.
Thermodynamics and performance of fuel cells and their applications. Reactor Theory: Neutron flux, Fick’s law, continuity equation, diffusion
equation, boundary conditions, solutions of the DE, group diffusion
ESL731 Biomass - A Renewable Resource
method, Neutron moderation (two group calculation), one group
3 Credits (3-0-0) reactor equation and the slab reactor Health Hazards: radiation
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area) protection & shielding.
Biogas-animal dung and agroresidues and other cellulose wastes, Nuclear Fusion: Fusion reactions, reaction cross-sections, reaction
ethanol from wheat or corn, sugar cane, sweetsorghum, beet roots, rates, fusion power density, radiation losses, ideal fusion ignition,
grapes, starch etc. pyrolysis of biomass. Direct combustion of biomass, Ideal plasma confinement & Lawson criterion.
Improved stoves routes. Plasma Concepts: Saha equation, Coulomb scattering, radiation from
plasma, transport phenomena.
Second Generation Biofuels:- Biodiesel from oil seeds, Gasification of
agroresidues, sawdust etc, Micro-power generation through biomass Plasma Confinement Schemes: Magnetic and inertial confinement,
gasifiers, waste incineration fluidized bed combustion of biomass. current status.
Third Generation Biofuels:- Algae based Biodiesel, Ethanol, Hydrogen,
ESL735 Hazardous Waste Management
alcohols from agroresidues, chemical composition of lignocellulosic
biomass fuels and chemicals from each 3 Credits (3-0-0)
component biomass (Hemicellulose, Cellulose, and Lignin), Chemical, Sources and classification of hazardous wastes, Assessment of
Thermochemical and Biochemical processes, Availability of biomass, exposure potential: Transport processes, Overview of waste
petrocrops, aquatic biomass and its potential, concept of bioeconomy management problems, Guidelines for handling hazardous wastes,
and biorefineries. Energy from organic hazardous wastes, Chemical waste treatment
processes, Physical waste treatment processes, Biological waste
ESL732 Bioconversion and processing of Waste
treatment processes, Thermal waste treatment processes, Nuclear
3 Credits (3-0-0) waste treatment processes, Waste elimination option, Domestic
Biomass and solid wastes, Broad classification, Production of hazardous waste, Hazardous waste management options, Toxic
biomass, photosynthesis, Separation of components of solid wastes metallic waste, Biomedical waste, Remediation of hazardous
and processing techniques, Agro and forestry residues utilisation waste contaminated soils, Engineering issues in waste remediation,
through conversion routes: biological, chemical and thermo chemical, case studies.
Bioconversion into biogas, mechanism, Composting technique,
Bioconversion of substrates into alcohols, Bioconversion into hydrogen, ESL737 plasma Based Materials processing
Thermo chemical conversion of biomass, conversion to solid, liquid 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and gaseous fuels, pyrolysis, gasification, combustion, Chemical
Introduction: Plasma based processing of materials
conversion processes, hydrolysis and hydrogenation, Solvent extraction
Plasma Concepts: Plasma fluid equations, single particle motions,
of hydrocarbons, Fuel combustion into electricity, case studies.
unmagnetized plasma dynamics, diffusion and resistivity, the DC
ESL733 Organic Waste to Energy Conversion Technology sheath and probe diagnostics.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Basics of Plasma Chemistry: Chemical reactions and equilibrium,
Different sources of organic and synthetic waste from residential chemical kinetics, particle and energy balance in discharges.
sectors, Commercial sectors, municipal sectors, Industrial sectors, Low Pressure Plasma Discharges: DC discharges, RF discharges -
and agriculture and forest residues, Estimation of energy potential Capacitively and inductively coupled, microwave, ECR and helicon
of organic waste from these sectors, GHG emission reduction discharges.
potential with waste, material efficiency, Concept of zero effluent Low Pressure Materials Processing Applications: Etching for VLSI,
based eco-industrial park, Lifecycle assessment (LCA) and its film deposition, surface modification and other applications (plasma
201

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
nitriding, plasma ion implantation, biomedical and tribological Overview of renewable energy technologies. Relevance of economic
applications). and financial viability evaluation of renewable energy technologies,
High Pressure Plasmas: High pressure non-equilibrium plasmas, Basics of engineering economics, Financial feasibility evaluation of
thermal plasmas – the plasma arc, the plasma as a heat source, the renewable energy technologies, Social cost – benefit analysis of
plasma as chemical catalyst. renewable energy technologies. Technology dissemination models,
Applications of High Pressure Plasmas: Air pollution control, plasma Volume and learning effects on costs of renewable energy systems,
pyrolysis and waste removal, plasma based metallurgy – ore Dynamics of fuel substitution by renewable energy systems and
enrichment, applications in ceramics, plasma assisted recycling. quantification of benefits. Fiscal, financial and other incentives for
promotion of renewable energy systems and their effect on financial
ESL738 power System planning and Operation
and economic viability. Financing of renewable energy systems,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Carbon finance potential of renewable energy technologies and impact
Reliability Indices: Unit availability, Capacity outage probability of other incentives. Software for financial evaluation of renewable
tables, Loss of load indices, operation of interconnected systems, energy systems. Case studies on financial and economic feasibility
Restructured power system operation. Applications of optimization evaluation of renewable energy projects.
techniques for power system planning, Generation expansion
planning, Transmission expansion planning, Reactive power planning, ESL743 Optimal Design of Energy Systems
combined generation, Transmission, reactive expansion planning, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Generation/transmission/reactive planning in the presence of Engineering design and optimization definitions, Concepts pertaining
renewable energy sources. to system design and simulations, Information flow diagrams,
Optimization techniques- Curve fitting, Lagrange multipliers, Search
ESL739 Bioenergy: Resources, Technologies and
methods, Dynamic programming, Geometric programming, Linear
Applications
programming, Modelling of energy systems, Steady-state simulation
3 Credits (3-0-0) and Dynamic behaviour Analysis of large energy systems like heat
Introduction to bioenergy; biomass harvesting; availability and exchangers, Power plants, Components optimization for maximum
assessment of biomass for bioenergy applications; characterization of efficiency, Energy storage optimization.
biomass feedstock (physico-chemical properties, ultimate, proximate,
compositional, calorific value, thermogravimetric, differential thermal ESL744 plasmas for Energy and Environment
and ash fusion temperature analyses); classification of biomass 3 Credits (3-0-0)
feedstock: first, second and third generation biofuels; hybrid biofuels,
Introduction to plasmas; thermal and non-thermal plasmas;
basic principles of chemical thermodynamics; carbon neutral fuels.
Laboratory plasma sources, Plasma in the Industry from the
Different pre-treatment processes of biomass; different production
energy perspective (Fusion: the green technology; Plasma-surface
routes for biomass conversion to biofuels: biochemical methods
modifications, Polymers, Nano-powders, Textile, lasers, Lamps and
(anaerobic, enzymatic- saccharification and fermentation process,
Displays, Power demand, Aerospace and Plasma thrusters, Micro-
and dark fermentation, ABE fermentation); chemical processes
satellite application, Supercomputers) Environment perspective
(trans-esterification, hydro-processing, micro-emulsification);
(Environmental control of exhaust gas treatment, Plasma treatment
thermochemical methods (combustion, gasification, pyrolysis, partial
of Volatile Organic Compounds and some other plasma ecological
oxidation, auto-thermal reforming) for biofuels production including
technologies, Collection and removal of fine particles in plasma
synthesis gas, bio-hydrogen, ethanol, butanol, biogas, methanol,
chambers; Hazardous waste problem and Plasma-assisted recycling;
dimethyl ether and paraffinic fuels; Biomass compaction (briquetting
Biomedical and health).
and palletisation); biofuel quality upgradation; and biomass and
biofuel fuel quality norms. ESL745 Environmental Audit and Impact Assessment
Biomass based incineration plant for heat generation; co-firing of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
biomass for heat generation for industrial processes; Biomass fuelled
Environmental setting-air, water etc., Sampling and monitoring-Design,
combustion devices for cooking and heating applications; Utilization
Types and objectives; Ambient and stack/source air quality monitoring
of biomass in external combustion engines including steam turbine
and analysis; Waste water monitoring and analysis; Environmental
power plant and Stirling engines; Case studies for setting up biomass
audit-detailed procedure; National environmental policy; Methods of
based small power plant (~ 1MW) capacity for rural electrification;
impact identification; Methodology of environmental impact studies.
utilization of biofuels in gas turbine, internal combustion engines and
fuel cells; analysis of carbon neutral and carbon credit.
ESL746 Hydrogen Energy
ESL740 Non-conventional Sources of Energy 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Introduction of Hydrogen Energy Systems: Hydrogen pathways
Types of non-conventional sources, introduction – current uses, General introduction to infrastructure
requirement for hydrogen production, storage, dispensing and
Solar energy: principles and applications, Efficiency of solar thermal
utilization, and Hydrogen production power plants.
and PV systems;
Hydrogen Production Processes: Thermal-Steam Reformation –
Biomass: generation, Characterization, Biogas: aerobic and anaerobic
Thermo chemical Water Splitting – Gasification – Pyrolysis, Nuclear
bio-conversion processes;
thermo catalytic and partial oxidation methods. Electrochemical –
Mini/micro hydro power: classification of hydropower schemes,
Electrolysis – Photo electro chemical.
classification of water turbine, Turbine theory, Essential components
Biological: Photo Biological – Anaerobic Digestion – Fermentative
of hydroelectric system, system efficiency;
Micro-organisms.
Fusion: Basic concepts, fusion reaction physics, Thermonuclear
Hydrogen Storage: Physical and chemical properties – General storage
fusion reaction criteria, Confinement schemes, Inertial and magnetic
methods, compressed storage – Composite cylinders – Glass micro
confinement fusion, current status;
sphere storage - Zeolites, Metal hydride storage, chemical hydride
Wind Energy: Origins, Basic principles of aerodynamics, Measurement
storage and cryogenic storage.
and distribution, Power extraction;
Hydrogen Utilization: Overview of Hydrogen utilization: I.C. Engines,
Geothermal, Tidal, Wave, and Ocean Thermal Energy sources.
gas turbines, hydrogen burners, power plant, refineries, domestic and
ESL742 Economics and Financing of Renewable Energy marine applications, Hydrogen fuel quality, performance, COV, emission
and combustion characteristics of Spark Ignition engines for hydrogen,
Systems
back firing, knocking, volumetric efficiency, hydrogen manifold and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
direct injection, fumigation, NOx controlling techniques, dual fuel
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG students in Minor Area) engine, durability studies, field trials, emissions and climate change.
202

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
Hydrogen Safety: Safety barrier diagram, risk analysis, safety in and planning implications of energy – environment interaction, Clean
handling and refuelling station, safety in vehicular and stationary development mechanism. Financing of energy systems. Energy policy
applications, fire detecting system, safety management, and related acts and regulations. Software for energy planning.
simulation of crash tests.
ESL751 Renewable Energy Resource Assessment and
ESL748 Economics of Energy Conservation Forecasting
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area) Types of non-conventional sources, Solar energy: principles and
Overview of measures and approaches towards improved energy applications, meteorological considerations for solar power: solar
efficiency and energy conservation in various sectors of the economy; resource assessment, solar forecasting for different timescales,
Need for studying economics of energy conservation; Identification uncertainty estimation evaluation of solar forecasting skill, Wind
and quantification of costs and benefits associated with energy energy: wind resource assessment, measurement and distribution,
conservation projects; Time value of money, discount rate and basic Assessment techniques, Site selection for wind monitoring stations,
formulae of engineering economics; Measures of financial/economic wind forecasting for different timescales using statistical and
performance for appraisal/evaluation of energy conservation projects; numerical methods. Biomass: Sources of biomass, measurement
Approaches for considering uncertainty in appraisal/evaluation; of productivity and statistical analysis of data, Forecasting based
Existing and potential incentives for promoting energy conservation on statistical analysis. Geothermal energy: Geological survey for
measures, regulations and policy measures; Carbon mitigation geothermal regions, Types of geothermal resources, Thermal gradient
benefits; Development of techno-economic models; Software for measurements, Monitoring micro seismic activity, Reflection seismic,
economic assessment of energy conservation projects; Financing of Deep exploration drilling and testing with estimation. Ocean thermal,
energy conservation projects; Case studies. waves and tidal energy: Measurement and statistical analysis for
assessment and forecasting Ocean thermal, waves and tidal energy.
ESL749 Developing Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy projects ESL752 Carbon Audit and Management
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Relevance of developing energy efficiency and renewable energy Greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector and their time trend;
projects, Key project development concepts, Project motivation- key Climate change and other potential impacts of enhanced greenhouse
drivers-pre development- gauging market characteristics that provide effect caused by anthropogenic emissions primarily from extraction,
motivation for the project and assessment of market readiness, Project conversion, transport, storage and utilization of energy carriers;
development framework-essential elements, project development Carbon foot print; Carbon audit; Carbon management- tools and
environment including existing policy environment- relevant codes accounting techniques; Life cycle assessment; Policies, regulations,
(such as ECBC), Pre-investment phase – assessing potential sites, protocols and standards; Carbon credits and carbon economics.
identifying partners, Assessment of commercially available energy
technologies for improving energy efficiency and harnessing ESL753 Solar Thermal Technologies and Applications
renewable energy, preparation of business plan (that includes 3 Credits (3-0-0)
feasibility study, engineering design, Financial closure, permitting
Solar radiation, Solar angles, classifications of Solar thermal collectors,
activities and related documentation and agreements), consensus
Non-concentrating and concentrating collectors, Heat transfer
with project stakeholders, Implementation phase – Procurement, land
fluids, Tracking mechanisms, Emerging solar thermal technologies,
acquisition, site preparation, construction, installation, commissioning
Application of solar thermal technologies: Power generation, Industrial
of the project, operation of the facility, Actual implementation of the
process heating, Water distillation, Refrigeration, Building heating
business plan, Monitoring and evaluation of the business and the
and cooling, Cooking, Drying, Thermal energy storage systems:
project performance, Issues in implementation of energy efficiency
Sensible, Latent and Thermochemical energy storage, Integration of
and renewable energy projects, Essential areas for strong project
thermal energy systems with various end use applications, Economic
development in renewable energy - site, resource, permits, technology,
analyses of solar thermal energy systems, Life cycle assessment of
team and capital, Size and diversity of potential project sponsors and
solar thermal energy systems.
also of projects in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency,
Risks with energy efficiency and renewable energy projects and ESL754 Nanomaterials for Energy Applications
appropriate de-risking/ mitigation measures and approaches, dispute
3 Credits (3-0-0)
resolution, Role of policies and support measures in promoting
energy efficiency and renewable energy, Developing community Nano-material Synthesis and Characterization Techniques:
driven projects, Developing projects for improving energy access, Synthesis of nanomaterial with 0D, 1D, 2D and 3D structures. Basic
socially inclusive projects, Issues in using public lands for developing characterization techniques of nanomaterial; X-ray characterization
renewable energy projects, Various considerations in selecting local (X-ray sources; wide angle and extended x-ray absorption technique),
versus imported technologies, Challenges in implementing energy Electron microscopy: high resolution imaging (SEM/TEM), defects in
efficiency in public sector within government financial and other nano-materials. Spectroscopy; electron energy-loss mechanisms,
regulations, Environmental impact and sustainability assessment of electron filtered imaging and optical spectroscopy of metal/
energy efficiency and renewable energy projects and projects while semiconductor nanoparticles.
addressing environmental issues, Utility scale versus local projects, Nanolithography and Device Fabrication Techniques: EUV lithography,
Examples and Case Studies – developing PV/wind power projects, Phase-shifting photolithography, X-ray lithography, Electron Beam
projects for enhanced LED use in domestic, commercial, institutional Direct Writing System, Focused ion beam (FIB) lithography, Neutral
and industrial sectors, environmental management projects. atomic beam lithography, Plasma-aided nanofabrication, Soft
Lithography, Nano sphere Lithography etc. Nanofabrication Using a
ESL750 Economics and planning of Energy Systems de Broglie Wave-Electron Beam Holography, Atomic Beam Holography
3 Credits (3-0-0) and Nanometer Lithography Using Organic Positive/Negative Resists.
Relevance of financial and economic feasibility evaluation of energy Nano-photonics and optoelectronic devices: Advanced photonics and
technologies and systems, Basics of engineering economics, Financial optoelectronic devices; Photo-voltaic, LEDs and Lasers. Spin tunneling
evaluation of energy technologies, Social cost benefit analysis, Case devices, Magnetic tunnel junctions, Tunneling spin polarization,
studies on techno-economics of energy conservation and renewable Tunnel-based spin injectors, Magnetic tunnel transistor, Memory
energy technologies. Energy demand analysis and forecasting, devices and sensors and spintronic biosensors.
Energy supply assessment and evaluation, Energy demand – supply Nanotechnology in other energy related Fields: Application of
balancing, Energy models. Energy – economy interaction, Energy Nanotechnology in other Advanced Energy Related Fields; Energy
investment planning and project formulation. Energy pricing. Policy storage systems, Fuel Cells, Battery, Super-capacitors, air/water
203

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
purification, and removal of domestic and outdoor air pollutants, exchangers, Laws of thermal radiation, Radiation heat transfer
Biomedical application, Aerospace and defense technology. between black and grey bodies, Numerical solutions of radiation
network analysis, Thermal circuit analysis and correlations for various
ESL755 Solar photovoltaic Devices and Systems heat transfer coefficients, Overall heat transfer.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL764 Environmental Economics
Photovoltaic materials bulk and thin film forms. The role of
microstructure (single crystal, multi crystalline, polycrystalline, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
amorphous and nano-crystalline) in electrical and optical properties Economic development and the environment, Relevance of
of the materials. Different cell design and the technology route for environmental economics, Economic efficiency and markets, The
making solar cells. Different methods of characterization of materials economics of environmental quality, Frameworks for environmental
and devices. Applications of Photovoltaic for power generation from cost and benefit analysis, criteria for evaluating environmental
few watts to Megawatts. initiatives, Command and control strategies, Risk and uncertainty,
Incentive based strategies - emission taxes and subsidies,
ESL756 Energy policy and planning Transferable discharge permits, Environmental policies, International
3 Credits (3-0-0) environmental agreements.
Energy (and power) policies in the country, Tariffs and subsidies,
ESL766 Environmental Regulations
Energy utility interface, Private sector participation in power
generation, State role and fiscal policy, Energy and development, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
National energy plan, Role of modeling in energy policy analysis, Environmental legislation and strategies to control pollution, Standards
Energy data base, Energy balances, Flow diagrams, Reference and setting criterion, Role of national and international agencies in
energy system, Energy demand analysis, Trend analysis, Econometric dealing with environmental aspects. Standards developed by ministry
models, Elasticity approach, Input-output models, Simulation/process of environment and forest, Sampling and analysis techniques, Data
models, Energy supply analysis, Costs of exploration and economics interpretations and relationships for the design of treatment facilities.
of utilization of depletable and renewable resources, Scarcity rent, Regulations for pollution controls of water, air industrial, automobile,
International energy supply, Energy demand supply balancing, Noise and hazardous waste environmental audit, Public liability
Energy -economy interaction, Energy investment planning, Energy insurance, Environment management systems, Catalytic converters
environment interaction, Energy Pricing. Can we add energy policy in vehicles in metropolitans, EURO standards, Bharat standards.
in India?
ESL768 Wind Energy and Hydro power Systems
ESL757 Renewable Energy Regulations and Law
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction, General theories of wind machines, Basic laws and
Introduction, Energy acts and regulations, building energy codes and concepts of aerodynamics, Micro-siting, Description and performance
environmental emissions related norms, institutional structure for of the horizontal–axis wind machines, Blade design, Description and
and incentives and other support measures for promoting renewable performance of the vertical–axis wind machines, The generation of
energy technologies, complimentary policies on energy conservation electricity by wind machines, case studies, Overview of micro mini and
and environmental emissions mitigation, Regulations pertaining to small hydro, Site selection and civil works, Penstocks and turbines,
renewable energy project establishment as well as integration with Speed and voltage regulation, Investment issues, load management
the existing supply structure, Regulations for energy pricing and and tariff collection, Distribution and marketing issues, case studies,
its trading. Wind and hydro based stand-alone / hybrid power systems, Control
of hybrid power systems, Wind diesel hybrid systems.
ESL758 Carbon Capture and Storage
3 Credits (3-0-0) ESL770 Solar Energy Utilization
Introduction to source of CO2 (Greenhouse gas) from thermal energy 3 Credits (3-0-0)
systems and their Global warming potential (GWP), carbon and CO2 Solar radiation and modeling, solar collectors and types: flat
cycle, Scenario of CO2 concentration in atmosphere, Relationship plate, concentrating solar collectors, advanced collectors and
between radiative forcing and greenhouse gas concentration, solar concentrators, Selective coatings, Solar water heating, Solar
Estimation of the equilibrium surface temper change, and global cooking, Solar drying, Solar distillation and solar refrigeration, Active
warming and climate change. Mechanism of CO2 emission formation and passive heating and cooling of buildings, Solar thermal power
during combustion in power plants (steam turbine, gas turbine generation, Solar cells, Home lighting systems, Solar lanterns, Solar PV
and internal combustion engines), CO2 emission reduction by use pumps, Solar energy storage options, Industrial process heat systems,
of alternative fuels and energy efficiency improvement in thermal Solar thermal power generation and sterling engine, Solar economics.
energy system, Measurement and analysis of CO2 emission in heat
engines / power plants / thermal energy system. Carbon capture: ESL771 Instrumentation and Control in Energy Systems
different methods (physical / chemical / biological) of Carbon 3 Credits (3-0-0)
capture from power plants, CO2 capture through pre-combustion
Basic measurement concepts, Measurement errors, Thermo-flow
methods, Oxygen-combustion method, Post-combustion methods
measurement – Pressure, Velocity, Force, Temperature, Thermal
(physical solvents/sorbents, membranes, cryogenic fractionation),
radiation, Heat flux, Humidity, Uncertainty analysis, Measurement
Chemical-looping combustion and algae species. Carbon storage
of wind speed, Wind direction, Solar irradiance, Head and discharge
under empty oil well, Ocean storage, etc. Carbon sequestration:
for hydro systems;Controls of solar and wind energy systems.
mineral carbonation, Photosynthesis of plants, Fuel production,
Measurement sensors for electrical systems: Voltage, Current,
refrigerant, Dry ice, Fertilizer, Working fluid for power plants, Industrial
Frequency, Temperature, Phase sequence measurement, Current
applications (textile, paint, mining, oil etc.) and Case studies /
transformers, Potential transformers, Phase difference measurements
numerical calculations for energy input requirement for CCS system.
other measuring devices. Analog signal conditioning, A/D, D/A
converters, Digital data processing, Sample and hold circuits,
ESL760 Heat Transfer
Clipping circuits, Opto-couplers, PMU, PMDC. General purpose
3 Credits (3-0-0) control devices, feedback/open control loop, SISO, MIMO systems,
General heat conduction equation with heat generation, Analysis State space representation of system equations, Stability analysis
of extended surfaces, transient (and periodic) heat conduction, of control systems: Eigen values, Eigen vectors, S-domain analysis.
Two dimensional heat conduction problems and solutions, Theory Measurement and control of harmonics in electrical systems. Air
of convective heat transfer, Boundary layer theory, Heat transfer in pollution sampling and measurement of particulates, SOx, NOx, CO,
duct flows laminar and turbulent, Boiling, condensation and heat O3, Hydrocarbons.
204

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
ESL772 Energy Storage from waste, life cycle of waste materials, Waste management in
3 Credits (3-0-0) different industries-steel, aluminium, chemical, paper, petroleum,
and Petro-chemical. Waste water treatment techniques. Agricultural
Sensible Thermal Energy Storage, Latent Energy Storage, Thermal
pollution. Application of air pollution control devices in industries.
Management System design using Latent Thermal Energy Storage,
Optimization of Thermal Energy Systems, Thermochemical heat ESL779 Li-ion Batteries: Technology and Thermal
storage system, Battery Electrical Energy Storage Systems, Pumped
Management
storage systems, Other electrical energy storage systems, Integration
of energy storage systems, energy storage system optimization. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Evolution of Li-ion batteries, Primary and secondary Li-ion batteries,
ESL773 Battery Storage Fundamental of various Li. ion batteries: electrode materials and
3 Credits (3-0-0) electrolyte processes, Overview of the post-Li ion batteries, Li
-ion batteries characterizations; testing and charging/discharging
Introduction to energy storage systems and devices, Rechargeable
methods, Strategies to prolong battery life, Second-life, recycling and
batteries and their Fundamental electrochemistry, Lithium batteries,
disposal of Li-ion batteries, Batteries and extreme weather conditions,
Nickel metal hydride battery, Lead-acid battery, High temperature
Battery system heat transfer and thermal management systems, Li-
batteries for back-up applications, Flow batteries for load leveling
ion batteries manufacturing and production issues.
and large scale grid application, Ni-Hydrogen batteries for space
and marine applications, Manufacturing technologies of batteries,
ESL780 Zero Emission Vehicles
Sustainable design of batteries, Hybridization of battery, Battery
3 Credits (3-0-0)
recycling technologies, Battery applications for stationary and
secondary use, Battery chargers and battery testing procedures, Introduction to various zero emission vehicles; Fundamentals of
Battery management, Regulations and safety aspects of high voltage Internal combustion (IC) engines (Spark ignition and Compression
batteries, Super capacitors. ignition engines); Emission and its formation mechanism (UHC,
CO, NOx, N2O, PM etc.); Emission control strategies including EGR;
ESL774 Quantitative Methods for Energy Management Exhaust gas after treatment devices (TWC, SCR, LNT, DOC, DPF);
and planning Lean burn combustion (PCCI and HCCI): Controlled auto ignition,
Homogeneous charge preparation strategies; Hydrogen fuelled
3 Credits (3-0-0)
vehicle: Back firing, Power drop, Fuel induction techniques; Battery
The necessity and the levels of optimization of energy systems:
operated vehicles: Introduction, Types, Batteries, Accessories; Hybrid
synthesis, design and operation,Laws of probability and Probability
vehicles: Introduction, Classification, Advantages and disadvantages;
distribution function; Basics principles of calculus methods,
Fuel cell vehicles: Introduction, Fuel cell system, Classification, Speed-
Mathematical methods for solution of the optimization problem;
Torque and Speed-power characteristics, Operational issues; Well
Classes of mathematical optimization methods, Sensitivity analysis,
to wheel analysis of zero emission vehicles, Net impact (including
Special methods for optimization of energy systems, Environment
embodied energy) of zero emission vehicles on Environment for
considerations in the optimization of energy systems, Meta-heuristic
assessment of CO2 emission.
techniques (genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization).
ESL781 Alternative Fuels for Aircraft and Rocket
ESL775 Liquid Sprays for Energy Sector and Industrial
propulsion
Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC for UG students as per Institute norms.
Pre-requisite(s): EC for UG students as per Institute norms.
Introduction to aircraft jet propulsion and aviation fuel requirements,
Course Contents: Introduction to liquid spray systems and their
physical and thermochemical properties of jet fuels, jet fuel quality
relevance in the energy and other industrial Sectors; steady and
and norms, ignition and combustion :Chemistry of conventional
unsteady sprays; statistical measures used in sprays; internal
and alternative jet fuels, production technology for clean and green
nozzle flows and interfacial disturbances leading to spray breakup;
jet fuels, biorefining, injection and spray characteristics of liquid
stability analysis; primary and secondary atomization; experimental
fuels, rocket and spacecraft propulsion requirements, energetics
spray diagnostics, spray modelling approaches; design of injectors
of propellants, liquid monopropellants properties, liquid oxidizers,
for spray applications; durability of injectors; applications of sprays
solid propellant characteristics and ingredients, metals as alternative
in heat engines, after-treatment devices, industrial burners, textile
energetic fuels, thermochemical analyses of alternative fuels for rocket
industry, carbon capture, photovoltaic eel I (fabrication, cooling), gas
engine, combustion chemistry of solid and liquid propellants, hybrid
enrichment, coating and mixing process in the industries, agriculture,
propellants rocket propulsion, electro-thermal propulsion, electrostatic
hospitals etc.
propulsion, electromagnetic propulsion, case studies.
ESL776 Industrial Energy and Environmental Analysis
ESL782 Emission Control in Internal Combustion
3 Credits (3-0-0) Engines
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Industrial energy use and its disaggregation (in terms of Introduction to IC Engine Emissions; IC Engine's Regulated emissions
production dependent, weather dependent and independent etc. (CO, HC, NOx, PM and CO2) and Greenhouse gas emissions (CO2,
components), Energy intensity, Pinch analysis, Lean energy analysis, CH4, and N2O), Transient emissions; Formation mechanism of these
Thermodynamics and energy analysis, Life cycle energy analysis, emissions (soot morphology, PM's size and count etc.) in IC Engines,
Energy analysis and energy management, Energy audits, Managing Effect of combustion characteristics on emissions of IC engine, Effect
energy efficiency in the industry. Basic approaches and tools for of alternative and renewable fuels on emissions of IC engine, Control
environment analysis, life cycle analysis and environmental impact strategies of emission at source level: Exhaust Gas Recirculation
assessment of industrial products and processes, Inventory of (EGR), Water injection, Use of gaseous fuels including hydrogen
materials and energy inputs and environmental emissions, Emission and natural gas, Control strategies for exhaust gas emissions with
factors, Relevant ISO standards (such as ISO 14040 and ISO 14044), after-treatment devices: Catalytic control technologies, Oxidation
Potential of energy and materials recovery, Case studies. Catalysts, Reduction catalysts, Three way Catalysts (TWC),
Nonselective catalytic reduction (NSCR), Selective catalytic reduction
ESL778 Industrial Waste Management and Recycling
(SCR), Diesel oxidation catalysts (DOC), Particulate emission control,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Diesel particulate filter (DPF), Emission reduction of IC engine with
Solid waste treatment and disposal. Sanitary Landfills. Leachate and renewable energy system under hybrid mode, National (Bharat Stage,
gaseous emissions estimation from landfills. Energy resource recovery CPCB etc.) and International (EPA, EURO etc.) Current and future
205

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
national and international emission regulations of IC engines / vehicles generation systems to power system at different voltage levels,
and emission testing procedures (ESC, ETC, 5-mode, 8-mode and Integration of small- hydro, biomass gasifier based generations
13 mode tests). systems to LV distribution networks, Modelling of various types of
storages in power systems, Power electronic based power flow
ESL784 Cogeneration and Energy Efficiency controllers for transmission and distribution systems, Power flow
3 Credits (3-0-0) analysis and State estimation, Security and Stability Analysis of
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area) renewable integrated transmission and distribution system, Optimal
operational dispatch and Unit commitment, TSO-DSO Interaction,
The cogeneration concept, Main design parameters for cogeneration,
balancing, Congestion management, Ancillary services for frequency
Cogeneration alternatives, cogeneration efficiency, Steam turbine
support, voltage support, balancing and inertial with different reserve
plants, Gas turbine plants, Spark ignition engine and compression
types (battery, PV derating, Pumped storage, thermal, HVAC etc.)
ignition engine power plant, Combined cycle power plant, Sterling
engine, Industry/Utility cogeneration, Tri-generation, poly-generation,
ESL792 Advanced Energy Systems
Cogeneration in sugar, textile, paper and steel industry, Case studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ESL785 Energy Analysis Latest topics on energy, Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle
3 Credits (3-0-0) (IGCC), Fuels for power generation, Advanced Energy Storage
Systems, Hydrogen Power, Clean Coal Technologies, Pressurized
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area)
fluidized bed combustion, Natural gas cycles, Integrated generation,
Energy theory of value: Principles and systems of energy flows,
Fuel cells, Energy conservation in power plant, Battery vehicles,
Methods of energy analysis, Energy intensity method, Process analysis
input-output method based energy accounting, Energy cost of goods
Electric vehicles, Algal biofuels, Metal hydrates, Geological CO2
sequestering.
and services energy to produce fuels: Coal, Oil, Natural Gas, Energy
to produce electricity, Energy cost of various modes of passenger &
ESL796 Operation and Control of Electrical Energy
freight transportation, Industrial energy analysis: Aluminium, Steel,
Systems
Cement, Fertilizers, Energetics of materials recycling, Energetics of
renewable energy utilization (case studies), General energy equation, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Energy loss, Reversibility & irreversibility, Pictorial representation of Real Time Monitoring of Power Systems: State Estimation, Topological
energy, Energy analysis of simple processes, Expansion, Compression, observability Analysis, Security Analysis of Power Systems, Economic
Mixing and separation, Heat transfer, Combustion, Energy analysis Dispatch & Unit Commitment.
of thermal and chemical plants, Thermo economic applications of Control of Power & Frequency: Turbine-Governor Control Loops, Single
energy analysis and national energy balance. Area and Multi-Area Systems Control, Effect of high penetration of
Wind & Other Renewable / Distributed Generation on P-F Control.
ESL786 Exergy Analysis
Control of Voltage & Reactive Power: Generator Excitation Systems,
3 Credits (3-0-0) & Automatic Voltage Regulators, Transformer Tap Changes Controls,
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area) Voltage Control in Distribution Networks using New Power Electronic
Thermodynamic basis of available energy, exergy and entropy, Exergy Devices.
balance equations for closed and open flow systems under steady Introduction to Market operations in Electric Power Systems:
state and unsteady state conditions, Exergetic efficiency definition Restructured Power Systems, Short Term Load Forecasting, Power
for various devices, components including heat exchangers, mixing Trading through Bilateral, Multilateral Contracts and Power Exchanges,
chamber and drying process, Exergy analysis of thermal energy Role of Distributed Generators in market Operations.
systems including thermal power plants, refrigeration and heat pump /
air-conditioning plants, Exergy analysis of solar energy systems, ESL797 Operation of Electrical Energy Systems with
solar cooker / dryer / collector / concentrator / solar still / solar pond / Large Scale Integration of Renewable Energy Sources
thermal storage systems and solar thermal power generation, solar 4 Credits (3-0-2)
photo voltaic system, Economics based on exergy analysis of thermal
General structure of Indian power system, roles of various
energy systems.
organizations like RLDCs, SLDCs, REMCs, ISO, CERC, SERC, GENCO,
TRANSCO, DISCOs, RESCOs, in power supply chain. Challenges
ESL790 policy and Regulatory Aspects of power System
with large scale Integration of RE sources, Scheduling practices
Operation with Increasing Renewable Energy Share
followed in Indian/International scenarios. Power flow analysis, State
3 Credits (3-0-0) estimation, Optimal operational dispatch, Unit commitment, Demand
Overview of the global renewable energy sector, Role of various side management, Security and stability analysis of integrated
international energy organizations and government bodies, Country energy systems with high penetration of Renewable Energy Systems,
wise organizational structure for regulatory deployment of various DSO operations, Market mechanisms to buy/sell power, Balancing,
schemes for RE integration at transmission and distribution level, Congestion management, Ancillary services for large scale integration
Electricity Act of various countries and their comparison Overview of of RE sources, Smart Grid/Micro grid operations.
global solar energy policies, Regulatory Issues with the Deployment
of Variable Renewable Energy Sources, Policy and regulatory ESL798 Distributed and Decentralized Energy Systems
Framework for rural electrification, Particular case studies for rural 3 Credits (3-0-0)
electrification in India / solar alliance countries, International Grid
Operation and control of various distributed energy resources (DERs)
Codes, Amendments for renewable energy integration, Specific
such as roof top photovoltaic, wind, small hydro, fuel cell and battery
requirements for solar and wind integration, Comparative study of
energy storage systems, smart grid and distributed energy systems,
Indian grid code with Nordic, European Network of Transmission
inverter control, parallel operation of inverters in distributed energy
System Operators for Electricity (ENTSO-E’s) network codes and
resources (DERs), voltage and current control of a three phase four
other country wise grid codes. Distribution system operator:
wire distributed generator (DGs) inverters in islanded/grid connected
countryside mechanism for DSO operations, EV scheduling, Demand
modes. Operation and control of biogas and biodiesel based electricity
side management. Time of Use (ToU) / Time of Demand (ToU) price
generation systems. Distribution power flow, operational aspects
regulation, factors influencing them.
of distribution systems with multiple DGs and energy storage.
Multi generation frequency control, voltage and reactive power
ESL791 Renewable Energy Integration and power
management in integrated systems with DGs sand energy storage,
Systems
stability analysis of DERs integrated energy systems, distribution
3 Credits (3-0-0) system reconfiguration, effect of DERs on protection, operation and
Integration of solar photovoltaic (PV) based and wind based control of rural/urban/industrial micro grids.
206

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
ESL799 Essentials of Electrical power Generation by carbon sequestration technologies; Analysis of energy intensity of
Renewable Energy Sources carbon dioxide removal system; Different scenario of CO2 emission
3 Credits (2-0-2)
reduction; Exploration of possible Sequestration of CO2 at source level
in industries; Issues and control measures of CO2 removal system;
Basics power electronic converters for renewable energy integration
Carbon tax and credit; Case studies.
to power system, basics of wind power generation, wind turbines,
generators (SCIG, DFIG, PMSG) and topologies, small hydro systems,
ESL845 Net Zero Energy Buildings
control of wind power system, processing of solar power, power quality
3 Credits (3-0-0)
issues, power quality control , control of inverter output impedance,
harmonic filters, control and protection issues with renewable Introduction to Net Zero Energy Buildings (NZEBs) and its Concepts;
solar/wind, parallel operation of inverters, power flow control, Different Definitions of NZEBs; Relevance of Such Systems; Steps to
synchronverters, operation of inverters in islanded/grid connected Achieve NZEBs; Challenges Involved in the Design of Such Systems,
modes, basic controllers for RE sources, PI, PID, intelligent controllers, Sources of Renewable Power for NZEBs; Thermal Loads and Energy
synchronization techniques, conventional, PLL , sinusoid-locked loops, Use in Buildings; Design Considerations in NZEBs: Building fabric/
need for micro grids, architecture and communication infrastructure envelope, HVAC and Lighting Systems, Integration with Solar/
for smart grids, Importance and challenges for decentralized energy Renewable Energy Systems, Building Management Systems; Optimal
generation, peculiarities related to integration of roof top PV and resource dispatch (thermal and electrical), demand side management
autonomous energy storage devices. Basic requirement of PV inverters with NZEB operation including HVAC, lighting control Operation of
and source of leakage current building microgrids in grid connected/islanded modes, provision of
ancillary services or peer to peer sharing among the various buildings
ESL804 pollution Control in power plants Comfort considerations in NZEBs: Thermal Comfort, Visual Comfort,
Acoustic Comfort, Indoor Air Quality; Carbon Footprint Mitigation;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
NZEB Case Studies, Future Directions.
Coal and nuclear based power plants-Fly ash generation, utilization,
disposal and environmental impact; Nuclear fuel cycle; radioactive
ESL850 Solar Refrigeration and Air Conditioning
waste-treatment and disposal; Instrumentation; Pollution control
3 Credits (3-0-0)
methods-(i) Pre combustion control (ii) Combustion control during
combustion clean coal technologies, advanced combustion control Potential and scope of solar cooling, Types of solar cooling
technologies (iii) Post-combustion Control; Gaseous pollutants control- systems, Solar collectors and storage systems for solar refrigeration
Flue gas desulfurization (FGD) Systems, SOx and NOx treatments; and air-conditioning, Solar operation of vapour absorption and
Electrostatic precipitators; Thermal Pollution and its impact on vapour compression refrigeration cycles and their thermodynamic
aquatic life. assessment, Rankine cycle, sterling cycle based solar cooling systems,
Jet ejector solar cooling systems, Fuel assisted solar cooling systems,
ESL810 MHD power Generation Solar desiccant cooling systems, Open cycle absorption / desorption
solar cooling alternatives, Advanced solar cooling systems, Thermal
3 Credits (3-0-0)
modeling and computer simulation for continuous and intermittent
Principle of MHD power generation, Properties of working fluids, solar refrigeration and air-conditioning systems, Refrigerant storage
MHD equation and types of MHD duct, Losses in MHD generators, for solar absorption cooling systems, Solar thermoelectric refrigeration
Diagnostics of parameters, MHD cycles, MHD components (air heater, and air-conditioning, Solar thermo acoustic cooling and hybrid
combustion chamber, heat exchanger, diffuser, insulating materials airconditioning, Solar economics of cooling systems.
and electrode walls, magnetic field etc.), Economics and applications
of MHD, Liquid metal MHD generators. ESL852 Emerging Materials for Next Generation
photovoltaic Applications
ESL840 Solar Architecture
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Wide range of non-conventional emerging materials for next
Thermal comfort, sun motion, Building orientation and design, generation photovoltaic applications will be discussed in detail. In the
passive heating and cooling concepts, thumb rules, heat transfer first part, fundamental photo-physics of different materials such as
in buildings: Thermal modeling of passive concepts, Evaporative organic, inorganic and hydride semiconductors, comparison of their
cooling, Energy efficient windows and day lighting, Earth air tunnel specific optical and electrical properties and basic characterisations
and heat exchanger, Zero energy building concept and rating systems, for solar cells will be introduced. The second part will be dedicated
Energy conservation building codes, Software for Building Simulation, for new emerging materials such as, Organic semiconductors,
Automation and Energy Management of Buildings. hybrid perovskite, metal chalcogenides and ferroelectrics for PV
application. Their fundamental properties, technologies and device
ESL842 Negative CO 2 Emission Technologies applications will be discussed in details. In the next part, carbon
3 Credits (3-0-0) based nano-materials and quantum dot based highly efficient devices
will be discussed. In the last part various technologies and material
Introduction to Negative Emissions; Paris climate summit on limiting
processing for the production of low-cost Si cell and their recycling
average global temperature rise; Future projected concentration of
processes will be emphasized.
Carbon dioxide (CO2) in atmosphere and consequences of Climate
change and global warming; Carbon budget; Overview of CO2 emission
ESL855 Solar photovoltaic power Generation
from industrial sectors, transport sectors, power generating sectors;
formation mechanism of CO2 emission in combustion engines; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Radiative forcing of climate change; Global warming potential (GWP); Components of Photovoltaic Power Generation with Cost-Breakup
Stabilization of CO2 emission in the atmosphere by renewable energy (Present and Projected). Various kinds of PV modules and their
systems; Renewable energy system with carbon sequestration features, IV-Characteristics and Electrical Equivalent Circuits under
technologies. various conditions. Effect of partial shading, Local and global MPPT.
Different methods/technologies of Carbon dioxide removal from Mounting structures and earthing for various kind of Solar PV plants.
the atmosphere: Ocean Liming; Enhanced Weathering; Ocean Cables and cable-layout, maintenance and standards for various kind
Fertilization; Forestation; Soil Carbon Management; Direct Air of Solar PV plants. MPPT algorithms and tuning parameters. Review of
Capture; Artificial trees; Bioenergy with Carbon Capture & Storage; basic power electronics and control systems. Charge controllers and
Pyrolysis process and Biochar; CO2 emission reduction through Inverter configurations. Off-grid power converter configurations and
Energy efficiency improvement in energy devices / power plants; operation (features). Grid connected central inverter: Configuration,
Integration of different renewable energy systems (solar photo- performance and features. Synchronization and other control
voltaic, solar thermal, wind, bioenergy, geothermal, tidal) with the requirements for grid connected power converters. Leakage current
207

Energy Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
and transformer-less power converters. Transformers for utility scale ESL885 Solar Industrial process Heating
solar PV power plants. Power quality and related standards. Power 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Purchase agreements. Emerging trends for PV power generation:
Basics of Solar Radiation, classification of solar thermal energy
Converter topology, Ancillary support and SCADA
systems, Non-Concentrating solar collectors: Flat plate and
evacuated tubular solar collector, Concentrating solar collectors:
ESL860 Electrical power Systems Analysis
Compound parabolic concentrator, parabolic trough collector, linear
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fresnel collector, parabolic dish collector, Optics of solar collectors,
Network modeling and short circuit analysis: Primitive network, Y Tracking systems solar concentrators, receivers for concentrators;
bus and Z bus matrices formulation, Power invariant transformations, Designing thermal storage for industrial application; Applications of
Mutually coupled branches Z bus, Fault calculations using Z bus, solar thermal energy system for various industrial applications such
Power flow solutions: AC load flow formulations, Gauss-siedel as pulp and paper, textile, oil upstream and downstream, food and
method, Newton Raphson method, Decoupled power flow method, beverage, pharmaceutical, leather, automobile industries, etc. Basics
Security analysis: Z bus methods in contingency analysis, Adding and of economics.
removing multiple lines, Interconnected systems, Single contingency
and multiple contingencies, Analysis by DC model, System reduction ESN702 Introduction to project Management
for contingency studies, State Estimation: Lone power flow state 0 Credit (1-0-0)/Bridge Audit (for students in ESR programme)
estimator, Method of least squares, Statistics error and estimates,
Project initiation and planning, Site and technology selection,
Test for bad data, Monitoring the power system, Determination
Regulatory, permitting and environmental compliance, Project
of variance, Improving state estimates by adding measurements,
feasibility assessment, Identification and mitigation of risks,
Hierarchical state estimation, Dynamic state estimation, Power system
Planning execution as well as monitoring of projects, Operation and
stability: transient and dynamic stability, Swing equation, Electric
maintenance of projects.
power relations, Concepts in transient stability, Method for stability
assessment, Improving system stability. ESN703 Technical Writing
0 Credit (1-0-0)/Bridge Audit (for students in ESR programme)
ESL870 Fusion Energy
Language and Communication skills, Basic ethics and styles of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Scientific/Technical document writing, Referencing in proper format,
Fission and fusion, Need for plasma, Lawson criterion, Confinement Planning Design and Layout of presentation, Important technical
problem, Laser driven fusion, Magnetic confinement, Plasma concept, jargon for Energy Engineers.
Single particle motions in complex magnetic field geometries, Equilibrium
and stability, Cross field transport, Important heating schemes, ESN704 Basic Thermal Engineering
Tokamak and magnetic mirror, Reactor concepts, Current status. 0 Credit (1-0-0) Compulsory Audit (for students in ESN
programme) / Bridge Audit (for students in ESR programme)
ESL871 Advanced Fusion Energy
(For Non-Mechanical students in ESN programme)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
First and second law of thermodynamics, Thermal fluid systems,
Tokamak confinement Physics, Particle motions in a tokamak, Toroidal
Standard cycles, Mixture of gases, Heat Transfer, Fluid Mechanics,
equilibrium, Toroidal stability, High-beta Tokamak, Experimental
Practical Examples, Use of steam tables.
observations, Fusion Technology, Commercial Tokamak Fusion-power
plant, Tandem-mirror fusion power plant, Other Fusion reactors ESN712 Basic Electrical Engineering
concepts, Inertial confinement fusion reactors, Reactor cavity, Hybrid
0 Credit (1-0-0) Compulsory Audit (for students in ESN
fusion/fission systems, Process heat and synthetic fuel production.
programme) / Bridge Audit (for students in ESR programme)
ESL875 Alternative Fuels for Transportation Power circuits and electrical machinery, AC circuit analysis, Three-
phase circuits, Power circuits components and energy conservation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
devices, Variable speed drives, Demand controls.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100 (for UG Students in Minor Area)
An introduction to hydrocarbon fuels-their availability and effect on ESN791 Applied Mathematics and Computational
environment, Resources such as shale gas and petroleum, Gasoline and Methods
Diesel self-ignition characteristics of the fuel, octane number, Cetane 0 Credit (1-0-0) / Bridge Audit (for students in ESR programme)
number, Alternative fuels -liquid and gaseous fuels, Physico-chemical
Fourier and Laplace transform, Complex and vector analysis, Matrices,
characteristics, Alternative liquid fuels, Alcohol fuels -ethanol and
Numerical and computational methods, Finite difference, Numerical
methanol, fuel composition, Fuel induction techniques, Fumigation,
methods of integration, Least square curve fitting, Introduction to
Emission of oxygenates, Applications to engines and automotive
C++ and MATLAB
conversions, Biodiesel formulation techniques, Transesterification,
Application in diesel engines, Dimethyl ether(DME), properties fuel ESp705 Renewable Energy Laboratory
injection consideration general introduction to Liquefied Petroleum
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Gas (LPG) and Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG), Compressed natural
The main focus of this laboratory is to provide exposure and hands-
gas (CNG) components, mixtures and kits, Fuel supply system and
on-skills practice to the students on various aspects of renewable
emission studies and control, Hydrogen combustion characteristics,
energy sources and technology. The students would be able to get
Flashback control techniques, Safety aspects and system development,
detailed insights into the design and operational aspects of renewable
NOx emission control, Biogas, Producer gas and their characteristics,
energy devices and systems.
System development for engine application.
ESp706 Renewable Energy Simulation Laboratory
ESL880 Solar Thermal power Generation
3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Simulation experiments related to Renewable Energy Systems.
Relevance of solar thermal power generation; Design and performance
characteristics of different solar concentrator types suitable ESp713 Energy Laboratories
for thermal power generation; Tracking of solar concentrators;
3 Credits (0-0-6)
performance characterization of solar concentrators, Storage option
for solar thermal power plants; Modes of power generation in solar Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 (for UG Students in Minor Area)
thermal power plants; Sizing solar thermal power plants; Operation
and maintenance issues; Emerging trends in solar thermal power ESp728 Energy and Environment Laboratory
generation; Economics of solar thermal power generation; Case studies. 3 Credits (0-0-6)
208

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Energy Science and Engineering
ESV891 Special Topics on Emerging Trends in Energy ESD852 Major project part-II (ESR)
and Environmental Technologies 12 Credits (0-0-24)
1 Credit (1-0-0) As per field of research required in the project in the area of
Renewable Energy Technologies and Management.
ESD798 Minor project (ESR)
3 Credits (0-0-6) ESS801 Independent Study (ESN)
As per field of research required in the project in the area of 3 Credits (0-3-0)
Renewable Energy Technologies and Management.
As per field of research required in the project in the area of Energy
& Environment Technologies and Management.
ESD799 Minor project (ESN)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
ESS851 Independent Study (ESR)
As per field of research required in the project in the area of Energy
3 Credits (0-3-0)
& Environment Technologies and Management.
As per field of research required in the project in the area of
ESD801 Major project part-I (ESN) Renewable Energy Technologies and Management.
6 Credits (0-0-12)
JSD799 Minor project (JES)
As per field of research required in the project in the area of Energy
& Environment Technologies and Management. 3 Credits (0-0-6)
ESD802 Major project part-II (ESN) JSD801 Major project part - 1 (JES)
12 Credits (0-0-24) 6 Credits (0-0-12)
As per field of research required in the project in the area of Energy
& Environment Technologies and Management. JSD802 Major project part - 2 (JES)
ESD851 Major project part-I (ESR) 12 Credits (0-0-24)
6 Credits (0-0-12)
JSS801 Independent Study (JES)
As per field of research required in the project in the area of
Renewable Energy Technologies and Management. 3 Credits (0-3-0)
209

Department of Humanities and Social Sciences
HUL101 English in practice HUL232 Modern Indian Fiction in Translation
3 Credits (2-0-2) 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Verb structures and patterns, avoiding common errors, vocabulary Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
building, spelling patterns, developing writing skills (composition,
Students would be introduced to the conditions, beginning in 19th
letter writing) etc. developing listening skills.
century colonial rule in India, which led to the emergent Indian
middle-class intelligentsia to experiment with European forms of
HUp102 psychology Laboratory
literature but striving for an alternative expression. Indian languages
1 Credit (0-0-2) became the medium through which writers sought to address issues
To familiarize students with psychological concepts through of identity, tradition, modernity, gender, the rural and the urban, the
practical training in a laboratory through experiments pertaining to private and the public. The course will study the various experiments
cognitive psychology, environmental psychology and physiological in narration, language, characterization and style undertaken by
psychology. authors to shape these themes.
HUL235 Rise of the Novel
HUL211 Introduction to Economics
4 Credits (3-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
The socio-politcal contexts which lead to the rise of the novel in
Current economic problems. Alternative economic systems. An
Europe – the emergence of print, the expansion of literacy, and
overview of the economy. The market mechanism. National product
the establishment of capitalism. Close reading of selected texts
and income. Consumption, savings and investment. Determination
accompanying concepts like the rise of the modern individual, varied
of national income. Aggregate demand and supply. Fiscal policy. The
narrative techniques and national consciousness. The emerging sub-
nature of money and monetary policy. Inflation and unemployment.
genres of the novel – the comic, the picaresque, the historical novel
Basic concepts of price theory. Determination of price by supply and
and the realist novel. The linkage of the novel to the colonial project
demand. Elasticity of demand and supply. Theory of production. Theory
and its influence on world literature.
of costs. Pricing in competitive and monopoly markets. The gains from
international trade. Theory of exchange rates. Balance of payments.
HUL236 Introduction to Drama
Economic growth, and development. Inequality and poverty.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
HUL212 Microeconomics Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
4 Credits (3-1-0) Brief history of the development and importance of drama in Western
and Indian contexts. Readings from both ancient and contemporary
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
drama theorists. Generic differences between different forms of drama
Micro versus macroeconomics. Theory of consumer behavior and such as tragedy, comedy, realist, ‘folk’, Absurd, etc. Detailed study of
demand. Consumer preferences. Indifference curve. Consumer important examples of different forms of drama.
equilibrium. Demand function. Income and substitution effects. The
Slutsky equation. Market demand. Elasticities. Average and marginal HUL237 Contemporary Fiction
revenue. Revealed preference theory of firm. Production functions.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Law of variable proportions. Laws of return to scale. Isoquants.
Input substitution. Equilibrium of the firm. Expansion path. Cost Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
function. Theory of costs. Short Run and Long run costs. Shape - Approaches to contemporary fiction - Looking at contemporary
of LAC. Economies and diseconomies of scale. Market equilibrium styles - realism, modernism, postmodernism - Contemporary versions
under perfect competition. Equilibrium under alternative forms of classical genres - the diary, epistolary form, epic, etc. - the
of market. Monopoly: pure and discriminating. Monopolistic relationship of society with science and technology through fiction
competition. Oligopoly. - the relationship between self and society through fiction -Race,
nationality, culture and identity - contemporary forms.
HUL213 Macroeconomics
HUL239 Indian Fiction in English
4 Credits (3-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Major economic problems. National income accounting. Expenditure
and income approaches to GNP. Measuring inflation and unemployment. The course involves a detailed study of 3-4 texts corresponding to the
Determination of the equilibrium level of income. Consumption distinct phases of literary activity in the genre: the early period of the
function. Investment demand. Aggregate demand and equilibrium 1940s and 50s in which writers like Mulk Raj Anand, Raja Rao and
output. The multiplier process. Government sector. Fiscal policy. Tax R.K. Narayan made their presence felt, before Salman Rushdie, and
receipts and Transfer payments. Foreign spending. Money, interest more quietly, Amitav Ghosh and Vikram Seth, erupted into the scene
and income. Functions of money. Definition of money. Reserve Bank in the 1980s, spawning a generation of writers attaining international
of India and Commercial Banks. Creation of money. The instruments acclaim - Arundhati Roy, Aravind Adiga, Kiran Desai, and many others.
of monetary control. The demand for money. Investment expenditure Some of the questions that will be addressed are: Who constitutes the
and rate of interest. The IS curve. Money market and the LM curve. main audience for this writing, and (how) does the writing cater to it?
Liquidity trap. The IS-LM model. Derivation of the aggregate demand How does one position the expatriate Indian writer both residing and
curve. Monetary and fiscal polices. Keynesian versus monetarist views. publishing abroad? How does English become an Indian language?
The aggregate supply function: Keynesian and classical. Inflation and Is there a thematic congruence in the novels that fall under this
unemployment. Stagflation. The Phillips curve. The long-run Phillips category, and does it differ from the thematic concerns of novels
curve. Inflation expectations. The rational expectations. written in other Indian languages? Students will be encouraged to
read a novel in at least one other Indian language in order to allow
them to pose these questions in a more pointed manner.
HUL217 History of Economic Thought
4 Credits (3-1-0)
HUL240 Indian English poetry
This course will introduce ideas in the history of economic thought,
4 Credits (3-1-0)
from mercantilism, socialism, communism, capitalism to the rise of
modern economic theory (e.g. utiliarianism), along with questions Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
about economic theory (especially from behavioural sciences). The aim of this course will be to read the poems of Indian English
210

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
Writers (pre and post-Independence), with specific reference to the and Mind-Body relation. The nature of ethical and aesthetic beliefs
articulation of their identity. Some of the perspectives from which and attitudes as part of understanding the nature of values. The
the poems will be discussed include the notion of home (childhood, discussion of the above issues will be influenced by three philosophical
family and ancestors); land (history, geography, community, caste orientational perspectives: Anglo-American Analytic, Continental
and contemporary politics); language (the dialogue between the Phenomenological and Classical Indian.
different languages in the creative repertoire of the poets); and
culture (ritual, traditions, legends and myths). The course will also HUL258 Social and political philosophy
look at the differences between the resident and expatriate poets
4 Credits (3-1-0)
vis-a-vis the conflicts and resolutions as expressed in their poems.
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
HUL242 Fundamentals of language sciences As closely aligned areas in philosophy– social philosophy with the
role of individual in society and political philosophy with the role
4 Credits (3-1-0)
of government- this course bridges divides between social theory,
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 political philosophy, and the history of social and political thought as
This course provides answers to basic questions about the nature and also between empirical and normative analysis through perspectives
constitution of human language in the mind/brain of native speakers. from metaphysics, epistemology and axiology. A range of socio-
Varied aspects of linguistic organization, including structures of political thinkers, theories and concepts will be taught. It will provide
sounds, words and sentences are considered to understand the core a broad survey of fundamental social and political questions in current
universals of all languages as well as their variations. Cases of feral contexts discussing philosophical issues central to political thought
children, language deficiencies and cognition-language interactions and radical critiques of current political theories.
are also highlighted.
HUL261 Introduction to psychology
HUL243 Language and Communication 4 Credits (3-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 Psychological Science- Assumptions, schools, methods of doing
This course offers a wide-ranging introduction to, and analysis of, psychology research, The relationship between brain, body and
varieties of spoken and written language. From political oratory to mental functioning, Sensation, perception and making sense of
examination answer scripts to computer codes, not to mention jokes, the world, Consciousness, Life span development and motor and
riddles and poetry, human language offers an amazingly rich set of language development, Nature and nurture controversy, The
structures for expressing and conveying our thoughts, intentions and learning process and some important explanations of how we learn,
desires. The course will consider some of these linguistic structures Meaning of motivation and explanations, Theories of emotions and
and communicative strategies in detail, beginning with early childhood expression and regulation of emotions, Basic cognitive processes,
development. How is it that children in every culture learn language so Language development, why we remember and why we forget- some
effortlessly despite its great complexity? The course aims to introduce explanations, Different kinds of intelligence, explanations of creativity,
students to a set of theories that address this and other puzzles and Differences among individuals and explanations for personality
mysteries in the arena of language studies. Finally, since a central differences, Application of psychology to everyday life- enhancing
focus of the course is communication, it will strive to be as interactive health and well-being, performance, social relations, and sensitivity
as possible, with lots of scope for the discussion and working out of to environmental, social and cultural contexts.
actual ‘problems’ in language use.
HSL262 Social psychological Approaches to Health &
HUL251 Introduction to Logic Wellbeing
4 Credits (3-1-0) 4 Credits (3-1-0)
In this course, students are introduced to fundamentals of informal The courses will focus on the following: Introduction: Social
logic and verbal analysis, material and formal fallacies of reasoning Psychology and Health & Wellbeing, Groups, Social identity and
often found in ordinary discourse, deductive and Inductive reasoning, Health: An emerging perspective, Stress and Coping, Stigma and
validity and soundness, formal rules and principles of the deductive wellbeing, Effects of Discrimination, violence and intractable conflicts,
system of Aristotelian logic, traditional square of opposition; Depression, Emotions and Health: Effects of Shame and Humiliation,
propositional calculus; first order predicate calculus; the modern Collective Participation and Wellbeing, Building individual and
square of opposition and the problem of existential import; identity collective resilience.
and definite descriptions; methods for formulating natural language
arguments in symbolic forms and techniques for checking their
HUL265 Theories of personality
validity; various meta-logical theorems and their proofs.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
HUL253 Moral Literacy and Moral choices Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
4 Credits (3-1-0) Personality: Meaning & Assessment. Psychoanalytic & Neo-
Psychoanalytic Approach ; Behavioural Approach; Cognitive Approach;
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Social- Cognitive Approach; Humanistic Approach; The Traits
This is primarily a course in applied ethics. It will focus primarily Approach; Models of healthy personality: the notion of the mature
on questions like: What is the meaning of right action? Can ethical person, the self-actualizing personality etc. Personality disorders;
assertions be true or false? Is morality relative to society? Or can we Psychotherapeutic techniques and Yoga & Meditation; Indian
say that acts have universal moral content? The course discussions perspective on personality; Personality in Socio- cultural context.
will help to demonstrate that morality is not always self-evident and
that rational morality must come in place of taboo based moralities. HUL267 positive psychology
4 Credits (3-1-0)
HUL256 Critical Thinking
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Positive Psychology: A historical and contextual overview; Relationship
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 between Indian Psychology and Positive Psychology; Correlates and
What makes philosophical thinking radically critical? Investigation predictors of life satisfaction and subjective well-being across various
of the nature of knowledge about the world and justification of cultures; Latest researches on self-esteem, optimism, flow, post-
knowledge claims. Metaphysical understanding of the Absolute traumatic growth, positive ageing, character strengths, etc.; Major
211

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
theories and models within positive psychology – Self-Determination HUL281 Technology and Governance
theory, Broaden-and-Build theory, Authentic Happiness, Psychological 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Well-being, etc., Interpersonal character strengths & well- being;
Specific Coping Approaches: meditation, yoga and spirituality; Future Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
of the Field. The course will begin with theories and concepts on the use of
technologies to improve governance such as efficiency, transparency,
HUL271 Introduction to Sociology empowerment, economic gains, decentralization etc. It will discuss the
concepts of democracy and governance, corruption and accountability.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Examples and case studies from topics such as information and
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 communication technologies for development, electronic governance,
Introduction to the discipline of sociology and its emergence as electronic voting, electronic databases (UID), web portals, community
a science in the context of the development of modern industrial radio etc. Public-private partnerships, regulation of technology by
society in Europe. Introduction to key classical and contemporary the state, surveillance, and the role of stakeholders in the policy
theorists in Sociology. making process.
HUL272 Introduction to Sociology of India HUL282 System and Structure: An Introduction to
4 Credits (3-1-0) Communication Theory
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
This course will begin with a discussion on the various constructions Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
of Indian society from colonial to contemporary times. The structural This course is an introduction to theories of communication for which
and cultural dimensions of Indian society are explored at the level of there is not sufficient time in the other communication courses, which
village, city, region, nation and civilization. Sources of differentiation, are mainly applied in their orientation. This is an interdisciplinary
diversity and unity are explored through institutions such as caste, course. It will examine how the notion of communication is used
class and tribe; kinship, family, marriage and gender systems, in different disciplines in the humanities and the social sciences. It
religious traditions and political organisations. Transformations in will intersect with problems of organizational structure, linguistic
these institutions are analysed and fault lines explored by studying structure, interpersonal structure and the problem of what is involved
contemporary issues of secularism, communalism, religious in changing a structure. This course will include no components of
conversions, caste and identity movements. The sociological remedial English, business correspondence or skill building activities.
perspective remains key to interpreting changes in Indian society in Only those really interested in theoretical questions should enroll.
the era of globalization and rapid economic change.
HUL286 Social Science Approaches to Development
HUL274 Re-thinking the Indian Tradition 4 Credits (3-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0) Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 Distinction between ‘growth’ and ‘development’; historical
The examination of sources, the structure, the texts and exemplars genesis and evolution of the concept of development; theories
of the Indian tradition provide the theoretical framework for the of development and underdevelopment; the political nature of
discussion of contemporary political and social issues. These are the development process. Role of state, market, culture and
economic development and social justice religion and the nation, civil society in development. Gendered nature of development.
communalism and secularism, caste class and gender equity and so Post-independence Indian experience (centralized planning and
on. The political misuse of tradition in programs of reform and revival socialism) of development; selected comparisons with China,
both in the past and in modern times will be highlighted to underline East Asia, South Asia, Africa, Latin America. Explaining India’s
the need for rethinking tradition in an academically serious manner. slow progress in human and social development, poor record
in reduction of poverty and inequality. Impact of globalization,
foreign aid and economic reform on India’s development.
HUL275 Environment, Development and Society
Experiments with decentralization and sustainable development.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 HUL289 Science, Technology and Human Development
Students will be exposed to contemporary themes and debates 4 Credits (3-1-0)
on connection between environment, development, and society; Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
industrialization and risk society; challenge of sustainable
The course will begin by identifying various dimensions of human
development; perception of the environment, dependence for
development and mapping the state of India and the world on
livelihood, identity, and power on natural resources; social ecology;
these indicators. It will then discuss theories about how science
what is the role of religion in determining our world view and relation
and technology (S&T) have shaped human development historically
with the environment?; recognition of indigenous knowledge; rise of
and the dynamics of technological change. Relationship between
environmental movements, development projects and recent conflict
innovation and human development will be discussed using examples
over natural resources; understanding major environmental disasters
from the appropriate technology movement, health, education,
and industrial accidents; global climate change negotiations; gender
nutrition, energy, environment, and others. Gender dimensions of S&T,
and environment.
indigenous knowledge, and radical critiques of S&T will be discussed.
HUL276 Sociology of Knowledge HUL290 Technology and Culture
4 Credits (3-1-0) 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): NLN101 Pre-requisite(s): NLN101
The de-mystification of science as a privileged form of knowledge To examine the relationship between technology and culture through
since Copernicus. Re-examining the laboratory, the factory and a consideration of modern/current developments in various specific
the nation-state, structures linked to the West-European model of areas: e.g. Biotechnology and Medicine, IT, AI & Robotics, Fashion
science. Examining systems deemed ethno-science or folk-lore, to set Technology, Magic Technology, Communications, Defense and Space
up a dialogue with institutionalized science. Comparing science with Research. To focus on the roles played by the IITs themselves in
religion as forms of knowledge having competing power over human creating ‘knowledge societies’ - that is, in influencing, formulating
belief and action. Examining Traditional Knowledge (TK) systems and and envisioning the links between technological ‘solutions’ and
their relevance for global economy. socio-cultural ‘problems’ especially in the Indian context. Here we
212

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
will discuss, for example: Patent Laws, Gender Issues, Environmental The course is aimed at developing an understanding of the economic
Ethics, Design(er) and Person(al) Technological Aesthetics, issues in a range of economic activities in the Indian economy. The
Technologies for the Disabled, Educational Technologies. themes that can be covered include performance of the Indian
Economy since 1951, agricultural growth in India, inter-regional
HUL310 Selected Topics in policy Studies variation in growth of output and productivity, farm price policy,
3 Credits (3-0-0) recent trends in industrial growth, industrial and licensing policy, policy
changes for industrial growth, economic reforms and liberalization,
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
population growth, unemployment, food and nutrition security, and
Allocation Preferences : HUL281, HUL289, HUL290 education. It will also include some contemporary issues.
The course will introduce students to selected topics in Policy Studies
as decided by the instructor. HUL318 public Finance and public Economics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL311 Applied Game Theory
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
The course is aimed at developing an understanding of the basics in
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213 Public Economics and Public Finance. Public economics is the study of
This module introduces students in economics and other social government policy from the points of view of economic efficiency and
sciences to game theory, a theory of interactive decision making. This equity. The course deals with the nature of government intervention
module provides students with the basic solution concepts for different and its implications for allocation, distribution and stabilization.
types of non-cooperative games, including static and dynamic games Inherently, this study involves a formal analysis of government
under complete and incomplete information. The basic solution taxation and expenditures. The subject encompasses a host of topics
concepts that this module covers are Nash equilibrium, subgame including public goods, market failures and externalities. The course
perfect equilibrium, Bayesian equilibrium, and perfect Bayesian is divided into two sections, one dealing with the theory of public
equilibrium. This module emphasizes the applications of game theory economics and the other with the Indian public finances.
to economics, such as duopolies, bargaining, and auctions.
HUL320 Selected Topics in Economics
HUL312 Distribution and Growth
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213
The course will introduce students to selected topics in Economics
Though empirical questions are central in motivating the issues on as decided by the instructor.
distribution, this course will mostly draw from theory. Papers published
in established journals will cover the major references for this course. HUL331 Modernist Fiction
It will start from some empirical pattern of development (Kuznet’s 3 Credits (3-0-0)
hypothesis), country experiences, etc. to motivate the subject. Then it
will try to understand the process of distribution, growth and structural Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
change using standard macroeconomic models. This course will be Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236,
heavily dependent on Mathematics - mainly calculus. HUL237, HUL240, HUL239
HUL314 International Economics The course will undertake a detailed study of some of the most iconic
Modernist novels by writers such as Virginia Woolf, James Joyce, Franz
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Kafka and Samuel Beckett. It will examine the radical new ways in
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category which they grappled with language, turned towards interiority, and
pushed, in the process, narrative art to its very limits. The discussion
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213
will highlight the experimental quality of Modernist literature, as well
Basic concepts of national income accounting, money, and balance
as situate it within the context of its emergence - the two world wars,
of payments; output and exchange-rate determination under fixed
the development of psychoanalysis, the growth of metropolitan cities,
and flexible exchange-rate regimes; fiscal and monetary policies in an
and scientific and technological advancements.
open economy; international capital movements and their impacts;
Case Studies: East Asian crisis, global financial crisis; theories of
HUL332 Fantasy Literature
international trade including factor-proportions and economies
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of scale; the international trading regime and its implications for
developing countries. Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
HUL315 Econometric Methods Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236,
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Major Themes of Fantasy: Archetypes and Myths; Motifs - journeys,
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
theology, devices and aides; creation of alternate worlds; treatment
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213 of time and space; close readings of individual texts.
Basics of sample survey; variance and covariance; correlation
HUL333 Theatre of the absurd
coefficient; simple regression analysis; Gauss-Markov theorem;
estimation of regression coefficients; confidence intervals and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
hypothesis testing in regression analysis; type-I and type-II Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
errors; transformation of variables; multiple regression analysis;
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236,
multicollinearity, heteroscedaticity, dummy variables, basics of time-
series analysis. HUL237, HUL240, HUL239
Socio-political background of the theatre of the Absurd, its basis
HUL316 Indian Economic problems and policies in Existentialist philosophy. The reactions against the conventions
3 Credits (3-0-0) of realist theater that dominated this theatre. The pre-occupations
of major playwrights with issues of language and the difficulty of
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
communication, the isolation that human beings tend to feel from
Allocation Preferences : HUL211, HUL212, HUL213 each other and themes of violence.
213

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
HUL334 From Text to Film all languages and cultures, and is found in a range of media. Life, in
3 Credits (3-0-0) all aspects, everyday provides grist to the mill of satire, but does satire
change anything? How do we define satire? Why is it considered the
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category social genre? What are the contemporary forms of satire? Who can
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236, practice satire? It draws upon diverse techniques such as allegory,
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239 irony, caricature and laughter. Through analyses of examples, this
course will familiarize students with satirical sub-genres and related
The course will involve a detailed study of 3-4 texts and their
literary practices, such as parody, burlesque, black humour, the
corresponding adaptations into film. By means of close reading,
grotesque, coarse humour, high and low comedy. It will examine
analysis, and discussion, it will seek to identify the changes that
the structure of satire, its relation with community, democracy and
take place during the process of adapting one art-form into another
matters of gender, caste race, and religion.
and ask why those modifications occur. An evaluation of what each
art-form enables and what it restricts or denies will enable a better
HUL340 Selected Topics in Literature
understanding of form per se, and of these two forms in particular.
Further, the course will address the question of genre and its 3 Credits (3-0-0)
conventions especially with regard to film, and observe the extent to Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
which generic expectations shape the process of adaptation of text into
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236,
film. Film screenings will be held outside class hours in the evenings.
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239,
HUL335 Indian Theatre The course will introduce students to selected topics in Literature as
decided by the instructor.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category HUL341: Meaning in Natural Language
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239 Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
This course will study the various aspects of Indian theatre. The
Allocation Preferences : HUL242, HUL243, HUL282
linkages between ancient theatre forms and existing forms of
This course examines different aspects of meaning/semantics in
indigenous performance in various parts of India – such as the
language. Some specific questions addressed here are: a) what is
nautanki, the tamasha and the jatra. The energies which were
meaning?, b) how do we use words to convey meanings?, and c)
generated in the urban centres through the encounter with European
how does our grammatical knowledge interact with the interpretive
drama – the Parsi theatre, the nascent Marathi stage, the Hindi theatre
system? We try to answer these and other questions while introducing
of Bhartendu Harishchandra and the nationalist theatre of Calcutta –
students to the formal techniques used in research on the semantics
will be explored. Special attention would be paid to the transformation
of natural language.
of theatre values with the intervention of the Indian People’s Theatre
Association (IPTA). The focus for the post-Independence period would
be on the diverse energies of urban theatre, group theatre and the HUL350 Selected Topics in Linguistics
‘back to the roots’ movement. The course would require students to 3 Credits (3-0-0)
study play-scripts as well as look at accompanying literature to form
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
a concrete idea of the philosophy behind Indian theatrical practice.
Allocation Preferences : HUL242, HUL243, HUL282
HUL336 Workshop in Creative Writing The course will introduce students to selected topics in Linguistics
3 Credits (3-0-0) as decided by the instructor.
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
HUL351 philosophy of History
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
The course will begin by seeking to distinguish the notion of ‘creative’
writing. It will contrast this heterogeneous category with other kinds Allocation Preferences : HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256
of writing such as the ‘functional’ writing found in text-books and What kind of understanding of the past does history provide? Is it
reportage. Through an analysis of various techniques of writing - in speculative or analytical? What constitutes historical evidence and
master-texts as well as students’ own productions - the course will how does it confine historical understanding?
explore why and how literary texts continue to be a prime source Questions of objectivity are the central focus of this course: that
of emotional and intellectual stimulation across cultures. As far as of historians themselves—constructionist and objectivist— as they
possible, the course will focus on contemporary writing, given that debate methodological issues and disagreements about the aim of
writers write in the ‘here and now’ even as they imagine the future their discipline, and that of philosophers whose interest in history
or return to past memories. Selected readings will be used to focus springs from their attention on history’s objectivist ideals and “the
students’ attention on that most difficult of problems: to acquire a objectivity crisis” in history providing a philosophical rationale for
style of writing that makes a writer’s ‘voice’ both unique and universal. reframing the two oppositions that dominate debates about the status
Finally, students will be required to write in some genre(s) of their of historical knowledge.
choice. These genres will include the classic areas of poetry, fiction
and play-writing but will neither exclude non-fiction genres like the HUL352 problems in Classical Indian philosophy
essay and biography nor forms of writing thrown up by the ‘new
3 Credits (3-0-0)
media’ such as blogs, photo-essays and narrative-writing for story-
boards and video-games. Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Allocation Preferences : HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256
HUL338 Functions of Satire
The course will begin by exploring the worldview implicit in the Vedas,
3 Credits (3-0-0) the Upanisads, and the orthodox systems and then move on to the
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category rejection of this entire system in Buddhism and Materialism. Emphasis
will be led on the diversity of systems and healthy dialogue between
Allocation Preferences : HUL231, HUL232, HUL235, HUL236, antagonistic schools of thought. Discussions will focus on the nature
HUL237, HUL240, HUL239, HUL256 of consciousness in relation to cognition of reality, theories of reality
Satire is a classical genre that has thrived over the centuries in almost in terms of realism and anti-realism; the nature of self and no-self
214

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
theory, theories of perceptual knowledge, theories of error; theories HUL357 philosophy of Science
of causation and other relations, and key concepts of moral and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
aesthetic thought. Wherever appropriate, problems will be discussed
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
in comparison with parallel discussions in western philosophy
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256,
HUL353 philosophical Themes in Biological Sciences Science is regarded as the most significant cognitive enterprise of the
3 Credits (3-0-0) modern society. In view of this, the course addresses the question
what sets science apart from other epistemic activities. Further It
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
concentrates on debates on the nature of scientific methods, logical
Allocation Preferences : HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256 reconstruction of scientific explanation, the relation between theories
This course addresses various philosophical questions that arise and laws on the one hand, and empirical evidence on the other, the
from the recent developments in evolutionary biology, genetics, nature of the justification and the notion of truth involved in scientific
immunology, sociobiology, molecular biology and synthetic biology. knowledge, and the societal influence on scientific practice.
How do these developments affect our ideas about life, evolution
HUL358 philosophy of mind
and the place of man in relation to other living beings. What is the
nature of explanation in biological sciences? Does the idea of immunity 3 Credits (3-0-0)
demand rethinking on the nature of our embodied self? What can Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
biological sciences tell us about healing, pain and death?
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256,
HUL354 Art and Technology Categorial taxonomy of Mental Phenomena: Intentional and
Phenomenal.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Theories of the Mind-Body relation: Cartesian Dualism; Behaviourism;
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category Identity Theory or Physicalism; Functionalism.
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256, Personal Identity and the Self: The First-person Point of View.
HUL290 Consciousness and Content: Phenomenal Intentionality;
The course begins by registering the increased presence of technology Representationalism; Internalism and Externalism about Experience;
in contemporary art. We shall keep the experiences of both classical Qualia and the Knowledge Argument.
Greece and Classical India alive where art and technology were not Consciousness and Self-consciousness: Pre-reflective Self-
clearly separated in the manner familiar to us. By positioning us consciousness; One-level Accounts of Self-consciousness; Temporality
between these two experiences - classical and contemporary we and the Limits of Reflective Self-consciousness; Bodily Self-awareness;
shall critically examine the complex relationship between art, science Social Forms of Self-awareness.
and technology which characterizes modernity. The course uses both Critique of the Computational Theory of Mind: Searle’s Chinese Room
materials from philosophical aesthetics, philosophy of science and Argument and the Frame Problem.
technology. It also discusses the philosophical writings on specific
areas like architecture, photography, cinema and digital art. HUL359 Metaphysics of the self
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL355 philosophy and Intellectual History in India
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category The course is a critical study of the problem of the self taken to be
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256, a substance by some and denied to have any substantial reality by
others. Focus will be given on examining the worldview from which
What defines the Indian tradition? Is there a singular Indian tradition
stems the idea of a continuing self, as a subject of consciousness and
or is there a plurality of Indian traditions in the public sphere
agent of action. Questions about whether it is material or immaterial,
today? How do these find representation in the modern and textual
real or nominal object will centre the ontological investigation into
frameworks? Is modernity antithetical to tradition?
the nature of the self. Special consideration will be given to the issue
The aim of this course is to take up these varied questions along of self-awareness and self-reference, and its relation to the linguistic
with their nuances to understand and re-negotiate Indian intellectual phenomenon of the first-person pronoun ‘I’.
traditions.
In this course, the examination of sources, structure, texts and HUL360 Selected Topics in philosophy
exemplars from Indian intellectual tradition provide a theoretical 3 Credits (3-0-0)
framework for the discussion of contemporary political and social Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
issues. Economic development, social justice, religion and the nation,
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256
communalism and secularism, caste, class and gender equality are
themes to be addressed. The political misuse of tradition in programs The course will introduce students to selected topics in Philosophy
of reform and revival both in the past and in modern times will be as decided by the instructor.
highlighted to underline the need for rethinking Indian Philosophy
HUL361 Applied positive psychology
and intellectual tradition in an academically rigorous manner.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will also take into cognisance the intellectual history
of the ancient past as it comes through the Vedic thought and its Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
contestations. Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267
Meaning and goals of applied positive psychology; Relevant
HUL356 Buddhism Across Time and place research methods of the field; Introduction to intervention
3 Credits (3-0-0) programmes including internet based intervention; Researches that
support intervention strategies : Psychological well-being and its
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
intervention programmes; emotional intelligence and its intervention
Allocation Preferences: HUL251, HUL258, HUL253, HUL256, programmes; Strategies for achieving well-Being; Mindfulness and its
Literature on Buddhism and Buddhist literature brings out the intervention programmes; Intervention module on stress and time
historical, philosophical and political synthesis of Buddhism in ever management; Character strengths : their role in well being; How
new cultural contexts. Interrogating and contextualizing engagements psychosocial resources enhance health and well being; Intervention
of Buddhism’s classical roots in modernity will be a key concerns in researches in Indian socio-cultural context; Current issues and future
this course. directions in this Area.
215

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
HUL362 Organizational Behaviour HUL366 Biological psychology
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category Pre-requisite(s): None
Course content is organised systematic, ordered approach in a
Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267
chapter-wise manner. Chapter 1 covers biological approach to
Introduction to organizational behaviour, Historical development behaviour from an evolutionary perspective. Chapter 2, 3, 4 and 5
of the field and some challenges in contemporary times, Learning provide a comprehensive understanding from the nervous system to
and perceptual processes in organizations and their implications the brain-behaviour link inclusive of lobes and cognitive functions,
for work-life,Work related attitudes- job satisfaction, organizational and how it related with the shaping, regulating of behaviour. It also
commitment, organizational justice, organizational citizenship covers research methods and approaches that helped understand
behaviour, Individual differences related to personality, emotions brain and behaviour. Chapter 6 and 7 illustrate sensory process
and abilities and functioning in organization, Group processes in (e.g., visual, auditory, taste). Chapter 8 and 9 introduces control
organizations, Formation of groups and teams, Effective teams, of movement, inclusive of motor learning, action planning, states
Communication in organizations, Social influence processes in of consciousness, waking states and sleep stages. Chapter 10, 11
organizations, influencing people, power dynamics and politics and and 12 held us understand the state of hunger, thirst, and states of
impact on organizational functioning, Theories and styles of leadership emotions, stress. Chapters 13, 14 build an understanding of learning
in organization and their impact on organizational functioning, and memory and language as cognitive functions. The course titled,
Organizational ethos and culture and its impact on productivity and Biological Psychology utilises a classic textbook to introduce simple
well- being, Various kinds of organizational structures and their and complex behaviour as a result of the intersection of biological
effectiveness, managing organizations in times of change. and psychological states, enabling an enriched understanding of the
behaviour.
HUL363 Community psychology
3 Credits (3-0-0) HUL370: Selected Topics in psychology
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267 Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Introduction to Community Psychology; Understanding Individuals Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267
within Environments; Individualism collectivism & community The course will introduce students to selected topics in Psychology
Psychology; Understanding Human Diversity; Understanding Coping as decided by the instructor.
in Context; Community and Social Change; Prevention and Promotion:
Key Concepts, Current and Future Applications & implementing
HUL371 Science, Technology and Society
programs; Overview of Community Interventions; Social support
3 Credits (3-0-0)
research in community psychology; Recent community researches
in Indian socio- cultural context: Effects of various socio- cultural Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
issues on individual and community well-being.
Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275,
HUL276, HUL281, HUL286, HUL289, HUL290
HUL364 Understanding the Social Being
The course will begin with social theories on the production of
3 Credits (3-0-0) technology and scientific knowledge systems, stratification within
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category the community of technologists and scientists, discrimination (race,
class, gender, caste) and the role of power in shaping the production
Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267
of technology and scientific knowledge. Scientific controversies, both
The social being- introducing the social psychological approach, historical and emerging, and the organization of innovation and its
Historical roots, theories and methods. Person and social perception geographies will be discussed. Case studies exploring ethical questions
and social judgements. Social cognition and social thinking. The social arising from new technologies such as information technology,
self- cognitive, affective and behavioural aspects of self. Positive nanotechnologies, biotechnologies, etc. will be used. Discussions
social behaviours- altruism, cooperation and volunteerism. Individuals on public understanding of science and role of the public and of
in groups-social facilitation, loafing, conformity, compliance. Social experts in influencing policies related to science and technology will
influence, manipulation and power- bases of power. Intergroup conclude the course.
relations- explanations and managing intergroup relations. Collective
behaviour- crowds and mobs- negative and positive aspects
HSL371 political Sociology of India
of collective behaviour. Aggression and violence- theories and
3 credits (3-0-0)
determinants. Reducing aggression and violence. Applications of social
psychology- health and well-being, law and organizational contexts. Political sociology is an important and integral component of sociology.
It deals with state-society relationship, the structures of power and
authority, and the dynamics of social and political change in society.
HUL365 Environmental Issues: psychological Analysis
It goes beyond the analysis of mere political institutions such as
3 Credits (3-0-0)
the state, political parties and electoral politics and tries to look at
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category political change through the dynamic and contingent relationship of
the political with that of the other institutions such as the social and
Allocation Preferences: HUL261, HUL265, HUL267
economic. Political sociology also examines and explains the way in
The implications of natural, built and social environment on human
which traditional systems of caste, ethnicity, religion and tribe interact
functioning, Making sense of environment-environmental perception
with modern institutions like state, democracy, secularism, citizenship,
and cognition, Nature of environmental attitudes and implications
and governance in the Indian context.
for inculcating pro-environmental attitudes, Various kinds of
environmental stressors and human response to these stressors,
HUL372 Agrarian India: past and present
Psychological analysis of climate change related issues, Psychology
and energy conservation- social and collective dilemmas and individual 3 Credits (3-0-0)
interests, Environmental disasters and disaster preparedness, Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Assessing environmental risks, Place attachment, territoriality,
personal space and notion of privacy and identity issues, Designing Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275,
better environments and role of psychological factors in the design HUL276, HUL286
process, Examining specific built environments. The course will use interdisciplinary texts to give students a historical
216

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
overview of agrarian India starting from the colonial period, plantation other sexual identities. Besides understanding how sex and gender
and export economies, recurring famines, community development are interrelated, we will look at how gender intertwines with societal
programs and land reforms after independence, the green revolution, areas of economy, technology, polity, religion and demography. The
and the neglect of rainfed / dryland regions. It will explore various important role played by social structures and institutions such
dimensions of development in agriculture including the advent of as caste, kinship, family, marriage, ethnicity, religion and class in
the agricultural sciences and the birth of the agricultural extension structuring gender and vice-versa will be brought out.
system. The myth of the ignorant farmer and the self-sufficient village Technologies associated with population and biological sciences have
will be discussed. Case studies on the historical roots of globalization transformed and are continuing to transform society and human
and agricultural commodity chains related to new technologies, and relationships in particular directions. The course will examine these
the linkages between the market and the state in contemporary transformations at the global and local levels and consider their
agriculture will be discussed. The growing social and geographical impact on individual lives. Challenges posed to intimate human
disparity with ecological distress and the threat of climate change, relationships and identities by new reproductive technologies such
farmer suicides, and debt spirals on the one hand, and a risky but as invitro-fertilization, surrogacy, sex selection will be explored. What
rewarding cash crop economy on the other, will also be explored. does the emergence/ institutionalization of new social forms - such
Finally the course will discuss aspirations of rural youth, opportunities as same sex marriages and parenthood by surrogacy - tell us about
for livelihoods, and gender and caste dimensions of the growing the possibilities and limits of human relationships?
urbanization of rural centres.
HUL378 Industry and Work Culture under Globalization
HUL374 Nations and Nationalism 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275,
The Course is designed to introduce students to a critical HUL276, HUL286
understanding of the nation as a historical and social fact, and
Globalization and Globality; Classical theories to understanding
nationalism as the feeling of collective belonging to the nation.
work and industry; Understanding Work, Work Ethic and Work
Building on sociological understanding of collective identity, the
Culture; Post-industrial society and rise of informational economy;
course will cover various theories of nationalism and touch upon
Job-satisfaction and alienation; Equalization of Opportunities and
different aspects of nationalism for instance, race, class, gender,
the Flattening of the World; Outsourcing as a Business Strategy;
ethnicity, culture, language, sports and religion among others. In an
Important changes in industry and rise of IT sector and BPO
increasingly globalizing world? Or does the idea of the nation still
industry; Governance and Collective Organization of Workers in
arouse anxiety over collective identity? In addition to assigned texts
select sectors; Corporate Social Responsibility.
and films, students will be expected to work on in-class activities and
assignments designed to further their understanding of the topic.
HUL379 Sociological perspectives on Organisations
3.0 credits (3-0-0)
HUL375 The Sociology of Religion
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): Any two courses in the HUL2XX or HUL3XX
categories
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
This course trains students to understand the social dynamics of
Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275, different types of organisations, with a focus on practices of work
HUL276, HUL286 and the making of workplaces. While familiarising students with the
This course will introduce students to sociological approaches to the theoretical approaches and concepts necessary to understand the
study of religion in contemporary society. Religion will be understood individual as relationship to the organisation, it will enable students to
in terms of its social and cultural structure; in addition the course think critically about questions of identity, agency, power and control
will also encourage a critical perspective on religion and society – its in organisational spaces. We discuss the interface of culture, ways
interface with society, polity and the economy. Religious conflict and of thinking, feeling, acting and being in different organisations. This
change, syncretism, popular religion, revivalism and fundamentalism enables a shift from the managerial perspectives and psycho-social
will also be considered. views of organisations, and draws out the complex negotiations and
tensions endemic to organisational life. The course also draws on
HUL376 political Ecology of Water literature on different types of organisations such as hospitals, prisons
3 Credits (3-0-0) and corporations to elaborate the unique cultural configurations in
these spaces and contexts.
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275, HUL380 Selected Topics in Sociology
HUL276, HUL286 3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course is an advanced undergraduate sociology course on the Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
political ecology of water. It discusses people’s historic and current
engagement with water, sustainable development and water, the recent Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275,
controversies and emergent resource conflict over water in the context HUL276, HUL286
of industrial development, design and implementation of hydropower The course will introduce students to selected topics in Sociology as
projects, water pollution management, and conservation strategies decided by the instructor.
(modern and traditional) and relates them to relevant national policies.
HUL381 Mind, Machines and Language
HUL377 Gender, Technology and Society
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Allocation Preferences: HUL243
Allocation Preferences: HUL271, HUL272, HUL274 HUL275,
Exploratory in nature, the course seeks to debate questions such
HUL276, HUL286, HUL289, HUL290 as: What are the implications of conceiving the mind as a ‘machine’?
The manner in which gender is conceptualized and performed is Can evolutionary theories about language and tool-using help us
foundational to the understanding of human social relationships. understand how we continually manage today to process the world
Gender identities are not fixed or determined purely by physiology; around us ‘online’? On this course, the class will be introduced to
their social construction affects ideas of masculinity and femininity or some state-of-the-art discussions in the interdisciplinary field of
217

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
cognitive studies. These topics will include: (i) the modularity of mind price-wage relationships. The course also deals with exchange rates
(ii) the content of consciousness, (iii) the language bio-programme and other open economy macro issues. It discusses the classical and
hypothesis, (iv) the relativism versus universals of controversy; (v) neoclassical theories of the macro economy, as also the critiques
strong and weak positions on AI, etc. The course will rely on down- of these theories by Keynes, Kalecki, and their followers. In some
to-earth examples to demonstrate that such an interconnected area of part of this course, students will be introduced to the emerging
study is not remote or esoteric but part of the intellectual excitement field of Macroeconomics along the line of Real Business Cycles and
of living in the new millennium and attempting to anticipate both how Dynamic Macroeconomics (Ramsey economy). The course examines
it will shape us and how we will shape it. macroeconomic policies, and the challenges faced by governments
and the Central Banks in implementing them, especially in the context
HUL382 Romanticism: The Theory of Animals, Monsters of the integrated nature of global finance and production.
and Machines
HSL513 probability and Statistics for Economics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): Any Two courses from HUL2XX category
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
Allocation Preferences: HUL231, HUL235
Probability and Distribution Theory, Estimation and Inference, ANOVA,
There is more to romanticism than Wordsworth’s poetry, or even
Linear Regression Model, Least Squares Estimator, Hypothesis Tests
literature in general. Nor is it confined between 1780s and 1830s.
and Model Selection.
Least is it a trend succeeded by Victorianism and realism, and
assailed by modernism. Romanticism contends with the question
HSL514 Issues in Development
of presentation – of representation of and to oneself. It therefore
3 Credits (3-0-0)
directly participates in the philosophical discussions of reason,
sensibility, emotion, subjectivity, and most importantly the idea of Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
human freedom. This course will familiarize students with romantic The course will be a survey of the major issues and debates related
movements in arts, in theories of language and society, in post- to development. It discusses the emergence of industrial capitalism
Kantian philosophy, in attitudes tor religion. Romantics not only in Europe and North America, as well as the economic development
engaged in experimental social practices and literary collaborations, experiences of Asian countries including China. The course will
but also articulated their necessity for the first time. Can we say with the impacts of globalization and the crisis in global capitalism
that romanticism is at an end? How does it contribute to both a that deepened since 2008. Issues related to inequality, human
nationalism rooted in folk tradition, and individualism expressed development, labour rights, and migration will also be covered. The
in the cult of the hero, the solitary intellectual? How does it both course will pay special attention to development problems of India,
look back to medieval occult and forward to novelties of science? particularly issues related to gender, caste and class.
Why is romanticism fascinated with animals, monsters and
machines alike?
HSL515 Indian Economy
HSN500 Interdisciplinary Reading Bootcamp: Culture, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Society, Thought Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
1 Credits (0-1-0) This course discusses the various phases and issues with respect
A selection of essential short readings in Literature, Philosophy or to India’s economic development. The topics discussed include
Sociology which form the prerequisites for understanding culture, India’s economic development challenges during the colonial and
society and thought will be introduced. the planning periods, and economic growth under liberalization. The
course will deal with the varied inequalities in the country, along the
HSL511 Microeconomics I lines of caste, class, and gender, as well as across regions. It will
feature issues related to Indian agriculture, industry, services, as
4 Credits (3-1-0)
well as trade and investment. The course will aim to provide various
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics) points of view on each of these topics.
This course provides an introduction to microeconomic theory and
is the first course in the microeconomic theory series. The course HSL516 Mathematical Economics
will begin with detailed analysis of consumer's choice behaviour and
4 Credits (3-1-0)
required mathematical tools from optimization theory and real analysis
would be reviewed. Producer's behaviour is analyzed next where Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
emphasis is put on characterization results under different market This course is an overview of topics in calculus, advanced calculus,
structures, especially strategic aspects in an oligopolistic market. optimization, and linear algebra that are relevant to economic theory.
The next topic is analysis of decision-making under uncertainty and It provides some of the necessary mathematical background to begin
Anscombe-Aumann framework is introduced. Next non-expected the core graduate sequence. The course covers a large amount of
utility theories are covered, Topics of recent and relevant interest material at a relatively high level of rigor.
will also be covered if time permits.
HSp520 Research project in Economics I
HSp511 Economics Lab
3 Credits (0-0-6)
4 Credits (0-0-8)
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
Experiment with sample survey data in India like IHDS, NSSO, NFHS
HSL521 Introduction to Cognitive Science
and census data, forecasting of macroeconomic data, simulation
4 Credits (3-0-2)
exercise, replication exercises
The course touches on some primary theoretical questions that led
HSL512 Macroeconomics I to the rise of a cognitive science movement in the mid-20th century.
Starting off with a critique of behaviorism, the course will introduce
4 Credits (3-1-0)
students to the works of the early cognitive scientists working in
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics) different disciplines (psychology, linguistics, computer science,
This course begins with a detailed study of macroeconomic concepts, neuroscience, economics) that shaped this interdisciplinary enterprise
which include an analysis of India’s national income and balance of the mind. Other topics that will be covered include representation
of payments data. It provides an understanding of the contending and computation; information processing (symbolic and sub-symbolic
theories of employment, income distribution, money supply, and systems); organization of the mind and modularity.
218

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
HSS521 Independent Study in Cognitive Science Some key concepts that will be covered in this course include critical
(Bridge course) understandings of culture, state, governance, capital, kinship, gender
and forms of relatedness, everyday life.
2 Credits (0-2-0)
Specific course content will depend on the needs of the
HSL572 Basics of programming for Digital Humanities
students.
2 Credits (1-0-2)
HSL522 Basics of programming for Cognitive Science Pre-requisite(s): None
2 Credits (1-0-2) Overlaps: 60% with Basics of Programming for Cognitive
This course is designed for beginners who have no prior exposure Science (HSL522) and 60% with Introduction to Digital Twins
to using and writing programs. The first part of the course will focus (COL100)
on “deconstructing” a program written to solve a simple task. As
The course focuses on the basics of programming, working with
part of this process, students will be introduced to strings, lists and
textual data, using natural language processing packages for distant
dictionaries and will also learn control flow elements like loops and
reading of texts, and visually representing the results. Students will
conditionals. Assignments will focus on modifying and enhancing
learn how to mine data from the internet or from other unstructured
existing programs.
sources, data wrangling techniques, data analysis, network analysis,
Following this, the second part will move on to topics such as
spatial analysis, and visualization.
functions and modules and object-oriented programming. Algorithmic
techniques will be introduced and applied to real data. Assignments HSL573 Narrative Matters
in this part of the course will encourage students to write (rather
2 Credits (2-0-0)
than modify) their own programs, sometimes using data from real
applications. Python will be the primary programming language used, The course will acquaint students with the distinctions of formal
but some flexibility here will also be allowed. and conversational, fictional and non-fictional narratives. Students
will acquire the training to think about and conduct research on
HSL531 Literary Theory discourse by going beyond the story and plot and considering
discourses in terms of salient narrative features such as narration,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
author, reception, motivation, tradition, and framing. The politics
The course will introduce theoretical approaches, topics and
of culture, representation and the working of power can be better
themes such as the idea of literature; concepts of ‘theory’; theories
analysed with a mind to the role of narrative in action, communication
of culture, language, meaning, interpretation; rhetoric, poetics,
and signification.
poetry; narrative; performatives; identity and politics in literature;
psychoanalysis and literary theory; hermeneutics. HSL574 Dimensions of Language
2 Credits (2-0-0)
HSL541 Language in the Mind
The course will provide an overview of the contributions to the study
4 Credits (3-1-0)
of language, its origins, diversity, and its metaphysical, historical and
The discipline of Linguistics as we understand it today is based on
political dimensions to learn how literature plays with and transforms
the idea of investigating the formal/computational nature of linguistic
language; the relation between language use and a particular
processes in natural language. This course begins by tracing parallel
historical and social situation; the politics of language with respect
developments in language and computation during the time of the
to state, religion, nation, gender and caste; subjectivity in language;
cognitive revolution in the 50s. As language is learnt from infancy,
rhetoric, stylistics; agrammaticality.
we begin by introducing two approaches to learning: top-down and
bottom-up. Further, we discuss language architectures that are both HSL575 Fieldwork Methods
symbolic and non-symbolic in order to account for a fragment of
2 Credits (2-0-0)
English grammar: the past tense and nominalization. Following this,
The politics and ethics of ethnography; fieldwork techniques; writing.
the course introduces some of the basic tools used by linguists in the
analysis of language, while introducing concepts such as the syllable,
HSL561 Cognitive Neuroscience
morpheme, constituent structure etc.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
During lab sessions, students will work on problem sets to familiarize
themselves with the analytical tools in linguistics. They will get Functional neuroscience, structure of brain, modularity and
a chance to work on datasets in South Asian languages such as specializations, development of brains, methods in cognitive
Malayalam and Hindi. neuroscience and neuroscientific basis of cognitive processes
(perception, attention, memory, learning, emotions, language,
HSL551 philosophical Thinking executive control, and social interaction).
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HSL581 Archival Methods
The course will cover definitions of philosophical thinking and
practices associated with these models – engagement with texts 2 Credits (1-0-2)
and interpretation; contemplation; argumentation; logic, dialogue; Pre-requisite(s): None
computation; and expose students to problems such as the relation Definitions of archive; uses of archives; constitution of archives;
between thinking, mind, consciousness, and body; the material public and private archives; digital archives; textual, visual, and sonic
conditions of thinking as a social and political act; thinking, expression archives, power and the production of the past.
and communication; rules of thought; the grounds of differentiating
forms of thought (philosophical, theological, literary, scientific) etc. HSL582 Theory and Method in the Humanities and
Social Sciences
HSL571 Contemporary Social Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will focus on questions of methodology and epistemology,
The course will familiarize students with contemporary sociological
intersectionality, reflexivity, narrative, and ethnography, standpoint
theorists and to trace the interlinkages with narrative theory and
methodologies.
political thought. The course builds on and is conducted in dialogue
with the classical theorists such as Marx, Weber, Durkheim, Habermas,
HSL583 Introduction to Research Methods
Mauss etc, and marks a departure from a strict separation between
“sociological” and “anthropological” theory, to focus instead on how 3 Credits (3-0-0)
they are both central to an understanding of the contemporary. Students will be introduced to a range of theoretical and
219

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
methodological perspectives in research. The topics of study include trade on economic performance will be discussed. Further, this course
understanding the need for research in social sciences, framing will focus on how global capital movements, domestic institutions
research design, objectivity in social sciences, qualitative research and political economy can affect economic growth and development.
methods and quantitative research methods. The course content also
includes short practical exercises on aspects related to methodology HSp612 Research Seminar in Economics
and research design. 3 Credits (1-0-4)
HSL584 political Thought Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Current trends in research in economics, practices and professional
standards of research, organising research output, dissemination
The course will focus on early concepts of politics and related terms
process, review and editorial process.
in various traditions; political forms and regimes; definitions and
formations of “state”; the notion of right; sovereignty; deliberation
HSL613 Econometrics
and democracy; constitutions; politics, law, legitimacy, and justice;
social contract; politics and material conditions; gender and the 4 Credits (3-0-2)
politics of social reproduction; politics and representation; politics, Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
caste, race and religion; political romanticism; the language of
Linear regression models, heteroskedasticity, autocorrelation,
politics; governmentality and discursive formations; the making of
generalized least squares, endogeneity issues, instrumental variable
nations, cosmopolitanism, international relations; public sphere;
estimation, limited dependent variable models, econometrics with
thinking anti-politics.
time series data, linear models with panel data.
HSL585 Introduction to Digitisation
HSL614 Development Economics
2 Credits (1-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will introduce students to the digitisation and subsequent
archiving of cultural material like texts, oral testimony, and other Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
ephemera. It will focus on ethics of sourcing and handling objects, Some of the topics that will be covered in this course include poverty,
digitization equipment, formats and compression methods, and inequality, education, health, and gender aspects of development.
digitization life cycle and repositories. The course will deal with history and persistence in development,
as well as with the roles of agrarian institutions and credit markets.
HSN590 Writing Workshop Other topics covered will include culture, social capital, behaviour,
4 Credits (1-0-6) corruption, violence and conflict. The impacts of international trade,
Study of different genres and styles of presentation of content; the foreign aid, and foreign investment on development will also feature
building blocks of writing (sentence structure, paragraph building); in this course.
exercises using samples to observe and reconstruct the structure of
HSp620 Research project in Economics II
academic writing (paraphrasing, quoting, citing); exercises to build
a long report through the preparation of proposal, title, abstract, 9 Credits (0-0-18)
main body (including introduction, sections, conclusion); exercises Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
to prepare annotated bibliography, literature review.
HSL621 Mathematical Foundations for Cognitive
HSL611 Microeconomics II
Science
4 Credits (3-1-0)
3 Credits (2-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
Pre-requisite(s): HSS521
Arrow-Debreu framework is established and equilibrium notion
Broad areas to be covered will include linear algebra (vector spaces,
is introduced. Existence properties are discussed and formally
matrices), real analysis and calculus (derivatives, integration, ordinary
proved. Stability of the equilibria is discussed and the conditions are
differential equations), and elementary probability theory.
introduced. Uniqueness is discussed next. In game theory, we start by
introducing the basic set-up of a complete information simultaneous Note: While there is an overlap between the current course and MTL
move game. The concept of Nash equilibrium is formally discussed. 100, the orientation of the current course will be based on Cognitive
The existence of Nash equilibrium is proved and the related conditions Science topics and themes.
are introduced. The assumption of complete information is relaxed
next and Bayes Nash equilibrium is introduced. The sequential game HSL622 Computation and Cognition
concept if defined next and the appropriate notion of equilibrium is 4 Credits (3-0-2)
discussed. Several examples from market structures, auctions, voting The course will provide a background about the historical ideas and
etc. are used to motivate the notions and explain the concepts. main presuppositions of AI and computational cognitive science. It
will let down the basics of representation, which is the dominant
HSp611 Advanced Economics Lab approach to studying both human and machine cognition. Then,
4 Credits (0-0-8) it shall delve into details about computational models, functional
architectures, cognitive architectures and also discuss more recent
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics)
advances linking discrete with analog systems.
Impact evaluation, Randomised Control Trial, Natural experiment
methods like Regression Discontinuity, Instrumental Variable, HSL631 Study of an Author
experiment in behavioural economics, experimental game theory,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
cost-benefit analysis of policies.
The course will introduce students to the work of a single author who
could be a novelist, poet, writer, philosopher, or a literary theorist.
HSL612 Macroeconomics II
Students will learn how to examine a text through close reading,
4 Credits (3-1-0)
critical evaluation of oeuvre, situating the text in its socio- historical
Pre-requisite(s): Only for M.Sc. (Economics) context. Examples of authors who may be considered in this course
The course aims to develop an understanding of the process of include: Sigmund Freud, Karl Marx, Franz Kafka, Walter Benjamin,
economic growth and income distribution in an economy. Historical Hannah Arendt, B.R. Ambedkar.
and contemporary experiences of countries on growth and
HSL632 The World Novel
developmental outcomes will be dealt with in this course. The impacts
of capital accumulation, technological progress, and international 3 Credits (3-0-0)
220

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
The course will consist of wide-ranging novels from different regions, morality; freedom and responsibility; theorising liberty – practicing
time periods and languages (in translation). Additional readings will be slavery; democracy and freedom.
used for historical contextualization. Theoretical readings may focus
on any of the following: introducing students to ways of understanding HSL655 The Idea of Democracy
the relation between history and form; providing contrasts between 3 Credits (3-0-0)
the models of comparative or world literature taken from the US or
The course provides a critical understanding of the idea of democracy
from Europe, and other newer approaches based on the link between
in terms of the history of ideas and historical examples of political
ethnography and the differing tableaus of world history; the relation
formations termed ‘democratic’. Fundamental readings of primary
of the novel to other genres, etc. Specific themes and texts discussed
texts and selections will be taken from across the histories of the
in the course may vary.
development of forms of democracy from Solon and Plato to B. R.
Ambedkar and Jean-Luc Nancy.
HSL633 The Lyric poet in Modernity
3 Credits (3-0-0) HSL656 Critical philosophy of Race
The course will focus on the generic work of the lyric in modernity, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
through the study of poets of the 20th Century such as Rilke,
This course will focus on race, institutions of racism, and the histories
Hofmannsthal, George, Trakl, Eliot, Yeats, Stevens, Akhmatova,
of race theories. It will address the following questions: what kind
Celan, Apollinaire, Perse, Eluard, Aragon, Char, Valery, Agha Shahid
of difference does the word race connote, and is this connotation
Ali, and Cavafy. Rilke and Elliot may serve as a guiding thread while
stable or historically changing in relation to racist institutions and
other poets will also be closely examined. Theoretical insights and
practices such as slavery, colonialism, Nazism, caste? Is race a
philosophical responses to poetry from Heidegger, Benjamin, Adorno,
biological concept (about the body) or a social and cultural concept
Foucault, and Valery will be introduced.
(i.e., a relational concept)? Can racism be combatted by scientific
refutation of false notions of race or by some other efforts at the
HSL634 political Theatre
social and cultural level? Why are the contemporary forms of racism
3 Credits (3-0-0) a continuation of older forms in many respects, and why are they
The course will introduce students to theories of political performance unaffected by scientific dismissals of the concept of “race”?
and the role of theatre as a part of political mobilization. Students
will learn about race, clas, and gender in theatre in the 20th and 21st HSL657 Machine Minds: philosophy of AI
centuries. The course will include detailed study of specific examples 3 Credits (3-0-0)
of political theatre from both textual and performative approaches.
This course offers a set of philosophical perspectives to the question
of how we should understand minds and intelligent behaviour. Drawing
HSL651 philosophy of Mind and Cognition
from classical debates and thought experiments in philosophy, the
4 Credits (3-1-0) course explores a series of inquiries central to the AI paradigm. The
Mind-body debates, materialism, subjective experiences, functionalism, course will also delve into the ethical issues about AI and consider the
mental causation, content of consciousness, structure of thought, possibility and desirability of machine ethics. Questions about whether
innateness, modularity, associationist architectures, embodiment. machines can become autonomous agents in any significant sense and
what implications it has for attributing accountability are taken up.
HSL652 philosophy and Its Histories
3 Credits (3-0-0) HSL661 Cognitive processes: From Labs to Fields
The following theoretical approaches, topics and themes will be taught 4 Credits (3-0-2)
in the course: definitions of philosophy; traditions of thought/histories Perception, attention, learning, memory, affect, concepts formation,
of philosophy; modern constructions of classifications of “west” and categorization, judgments.
“east”; and their relation to actual multiple histories of philosophy;
relations of philosophy to politics, religion, theology, science, and art, HSL671 Reading Ethnographic Texts
and to disciplines like philology, anthropology, aesthetics, history; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
“end of philosophy”.
The course introduces students to the politics of ethnographic writing
through themes including Historical perspectives on ethnography as a
HSL653 principles of Rationalism and Empiricism
mode of inquiry; ethnography as text; field and the self; constitution of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
the site: ethnographic authority; debates on representation; feminist
To what extent does sense experience ground our knowledge of encounters in ethnography.
the world and what is cognitive role of reflective experience? The
course explores this debate by surveying some key epistemological HSL672 Making Sense of the Everyday: Theories,
and metaphysical issues in the works of six major philosophers Debates and Critiques
– Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley and Hume. Topics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
covered from Descartes include foundationalism and criteria for
certainty, internalism and doubting arguments, theory of ideas and This course explores theories of everyday life; ways of reading the
substance dualism. From Spinoza: substance monism, theory of everyday across different social spaces; power relations, agency and
attributes, knowledge and cognition. Leibniz: principles of sufficient resistance in everyday processes. Through texts and ethnographic
reason and identity, predicate-in-notion, contradiction and continuity. readings, it will draw together the relationship of everyday life with
Locke: concept empiricism, representation, qualities, personal socio-cultural, political and economic practices.
identity, knowledge and judgement. Berkeley: likeness principle,
HSL673 Family, Marriage, and Kinship
anti-abstractionism, immaterialism, master argument and active
substances. Hume: copy principle, the fork, associationism and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
sceptical doubts, and ideas of necessary connection. The course will cover anthropological perspectives on kinship,
marriage and family to build on the themes of descent systems,
HSL654 Ideas of Freedom structures and processes in kinship, marriage practices, alternative
3 Credits (3-0-0) forms of kinship and family, new reproductive technologies, and
biology-culture debate.
This course will focus on the following topics: free will, self-
determination; divine freedom; human freedom as a metaphysical
HSL674 Urban Ethnography
idea; distinguishing between freedom and liberty, Freedom of
speech and expression, and censorship; freedom of conscience and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
law; existentialist conceptions of freedom; centrality of freedom to The course builds an anthropological perspective on the organization
221

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
and governance of cities and the myriad experiences of urban life. HSL683 Feminist Thought
It will engage critically with theories of urban development, urban 3 Credits (3-0-0)
space, and urban experience. While most of these theories emerge
This course will examine the theoretical underpinnings, current
from the developed Western cities, the course will attempt to draw on
controversies, and new lines of feminist thought, as well as how
urban ethnographic work in India and the global South to explore how
these ideas affect various feminisms, research, and epistemology. The
emerging concepts and ideas from these post-colonial, developing,
course will cover the following topics: sex/gender system, sexualities
and marginal contexts engage with the theories and concepts from
and identities, feminist epistemologies, intersectionality, standpoint
Western cities. The course also draws on methodological insights of
theory, feminist science, embodiment, medicalisation and the domains
studying the ‘urban’.
of sexual and reproductive rights.
HSL675 Education and Society
HSL684 Queering Gender and Sexuality: Debates and
3 Credits (3-0-0) Issues from India
Education and the social order; ideas of education; Pedagogy 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and praxis in education; curriculum and critical thinking; Social
The course will focus on the following topics: queer engagement
reproduction: cultures of learning and labour; Sites of agency and
with gender and sexuality, critiques of the gender binary, politics of
resistance; Higher Education: Aspirational cultures and the University;
identity and sexuality, genealogy of LGBTQIA+ movements, gender
Writing the personal in education; Education in policy.
and citizenship.
HSL676 Religion and Society
HSL685 Culture and politics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps: 30% with HUL375 The course will focus on: ● cultural theory, methodologies,
interdisciplinarity of studying culture; debates regarding high and low
Theoretical approaches to the study of religion, sacred space and
culture, popular culture; culture as an all-encompassing term including
time, the constitution of religion as epistemology and cognitive
material culture, ethos, ethnos and way of life; anthropology, philology,
category, religious belief and practice, secularism, syncretism,
historiography and the use of culture with respect to language, gender,
secularization, everyday ethics, symbols, religion and modernity,
race, religion, caste, and nation; culture as practices, representation,
religious marketplace, individualism and rational choice, religious
translation, identity, production, commodification; art, culture
conversion, identity and change.
industry, media and the new communication technologies; politics
of culture: heritage, conservation, appropriation.
HSL677 Comparative Literature: History, Theory and
Method
HSL686 Foundations in the Digital Humanities
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will introduce students to the disciplinary formation of
Pre-requisite(s):
comparative literature, its theories, and history. It will consider the
This course will introduce students to the fundamental concepts in
following topics: origins in crisis; new critical practices; multilingualism,
the digital humanities. This course is designed to be complementary
vernaculars and translations; the future of (comparative) literature.
to courses in digital humanities tools and methods and it will
help students connect concepts learned in traditional humanities
HSL678 Cinemas of India
classrooms with new, evolving digital tools and interfaces.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course introduces studies on Cinemas of India that foreground HSL687 Introduction to Medical Humanities
the South Asian region with a film and cultural studies focus. The 3 Credits (3-0-0)
following theoretical approaches, topics and themes will be taught: Pre-requisite(s):
Cinemas of India: introduction and theory; Bollywood and the Hindi
Course Contents: This course will focus on the different conceptions
film; regional cinemas; themes and perspectives; the business of
of “health” and “illness”; approaches to the body, ability and disability;
cinema in India; cinema experience and audiences.
traditions of medicine and healing; medicine and society; biologization
of medicine, medicalization of the body; Psyche, body, psychoanalysis;
HSL681 print Culture and History Bioethics; approaches to practitioners, patients and the clinic; health
3 Credits (3-0-0) infrastructure, public health and governmentality; health and gender;
This course explores print history and culture by studying the role nutrition, poverty and social justice; agency, self-hood, personhood,
of technologies and their modes of social, cultural, and textual responsibility.
existence. It problematizes how print constitutes human experience
in the ‘modern’ epoch. It also enables students to investigate how HUL688 Agrarian Societies and Transformation
cognition, sense perception, bodily and emotional engagement have 3 Credits (3-0-0)
been configured in history through print. The course will introduce The course explores questions of capitalist relations in agrarian
print as a modern phenomenon and foreground ideas of culture, societies, the narratives of resistance that emerge and how they
power, pleasure, resistance, and community to study print history. enable alternate conceptions of agrarian sociality. The course will
Topics to be covered include introduction to the history of print, enable students to challenge the commonplace distinction between
method and theory, print as culture, print as power, print as pleasure, the rural and urban, while drawing on theoretical debates on the
print communities. transformation of agrarian societies, and critical examinations of
the relationship between land, market, labour, and agrarian futures.
HSL682 Introduction to Anti-Caste Thought and
Literature HSL689 policing and the Social Order
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): This course will introduce students to the following topics: sociological
Course Contents: The course will focus on the following topics: and anthropological approaches to understanding policing; policing
Buddhist critiques of caste; Bhakti movement; anti-Brahmanism; anti- and the state; police fetishism; policing beyond the state: multiple
caste movements and new discourses (Jotirao Phule, Iyothee Thass, sovereignties – family, caste, state; colonial policing; police
Periyar, Ambedkar); literary articulations of about and against caste delegitimation; surveillance and policing; digital technologies.
and casteism (Dalit literature: autobiography, poetry); Role of anti-
HSD690 Research project part - I
racism in anti-caste thought; Debates on sociology and historiography
of caste; Anti-caste expressive cultures 3 Credits (0-0-6)
222

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
Pre-requisite(s):combinations of courses: eg. (XYZ123 & HUL707 Social psychology
XYW214) / XYZ234 3 Credits (2-1-0)
Course Contents: In the major project, students will write a Schools of social psychology with special reference to personality and
dissertation on a special topic chosen in consultation with a faculty social structure. The problems and methods of social psychology.
supervisor. This part of the project will train students to: select a The association motive. Interpersonal attraction. Learning in social
substantive topic of study and identify the literature and the debates context. Social motives and attitudes. Social influence. Dissonance.
in the chosen area of study; preparing a broad matrix for the literature Consonance and balance. Social status: Its effect on social motives and
on the topic chosen and debates around it; preparing an annotated behaviour, social roles. Personality and social phenomenon. Cultural
bibliography; reading to build the research proposal. influences on personality and social behaviour. Social perception
communication. Group process. Group task performance : Problem
HSD691 Research project part - II solving co-operation and competition. Leaders and leadership. Power
4 Credits (0-0-8) and politics in organisations. Psychological processes in organizations.
Aggression and its management.
Pre-requisite(s): combinations of courses: eg. (XYZ123 &
XYW214) / XYZ234 HUL709 Social Research Methods
This part of the research project and dissertation writing will involve
3 Credits (2-1-0)
developing a research idea; doing a feasibility mapping of the research
Scientific approach to social research. Concepts and indices. Analytical
idea; identifying texts, archives, sources and fields; thinking about
and formal aspects. Hypothesis formulation and testing strategies.
questions of methodology; articulating possible methodological and
Design of applied empirical research. Measurement and interpretation
analytical routes for the research study; doing a complete literature
of social data. Social statistics. Sampling designs, report writing.
review; reviewing a text; identifying possible gaps in the literature;
critical analysis of the literature.
HUL710 personality Structure and Dynamics
HSD692 Research project part - III 3 Credits (2-1-0)
13 Credits (0-0-26) The topics for discussion will be : Coping with stress. Model of success
and failure in adjustment. Approaches to the study of personality.
Pre-requisite(s): combinations of courses: eg. (XYZ123 &
Freud’s classical psychoanalytic theory, Jung’s analytic theory, Adler’s
XYW214) / XYZ234 individual psychology, Roger’s person- centred approach. Lwein’s
This course will involve conducting research using textual, archival or field theory, Skinner’s operant reinforcement theory. Erikson’s theory:
field based data; identifying challenges and exploring ways of dealing Psychohistorian perspective of man. Models of healthy personality;
with them; navigating ethical issues; interpreting texts, field data and mature person: Allport’s model. Self-actualising person: Maslow’s
data from other sources; breaking down data into themes, codes and model. Here-and-now person: Perl’s model. Roger’s theory : on
categories for analysis; analysing data; and writing. Students will becoming a person.
learn to collect data or develop the resources to work with different
media, corpuses and archives; organize the material thematically HSL711 Macro Development Economics
and as responses to the pertinent research questions; write clearly, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
structure their arguments and communicate their ideas concerning
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)--
the chosen topics.
Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses in
HSP700 Workshop on Scientific Writing the first year. For UG students--any ONE of: HUL212, HUL213,
HUL311, HUL312, HUL211, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320
2 Credits (0-2-0)
This course covers the following topics: significance of agriculture
The course is divided into seven 4hr sections each associated with
in developing countries, poverty and population issues facing the
its reading and practice exercises. The first three sections focus on
world, international trade, and importance of foreign aid, poverty and
language aspects crucial for academic writing, while the next four are
income distribution, the role of geography and institutions, fertility
about the particular compositionality and styles of scientific writing.
and population growth, the role of credit markets and microfinance,
health and nutrition, education, female empowerment, the meaning
HUD700 Seminar (Case Material-based) Minor project
and measurement of economic development, etc.
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Students would under take a supervised research project. HUL711 psychological Testing & Behavioral Assessment
3 Credits (2-1-0)
HUL704 Inclusive Innovation: Theory and practice
The concept of Behavioral Assessment: Uses and Varieties of
4 Credits (2-0-4)
Psychological Tests, Why Control the use of Psychological Tests?
The course will familiarize students with key concepts in innovation, Test Administration, Examiner and Situational Variables and Effects
including various elements of the innovation cycle going all the of Training on Test Performance.
way from need identification to deployment. Key aspects relating
Technical and Methodological Principles: Test Construction, Norms
to inclusive innovation - the public goods nature of many basic
and The Meaning of Test Scores, Reliability and its Types, Validity
needs, user and market characteristics, delivery and scaling-up
and its Basic Concepts and Item Analysis.
considerations, and the role of partnerships and policies - will receive
Other Techniques of Behavioral Assessment: Interview, Questionnaire
particular focus. The students will also be introduced to the state-of-
and Schedule, Content Analysis, Observation as a tool of data
the-art thinking in organizing for innovation, especially for the bottom
collection, Rating Scales, Survey and Projective Techniques. Brief
of the pyramid. This theoretical knowledge will be complemented
Review of some Selected Psychological Tests and Concluding
with hands-on exercises aimed to familiarize students with some of
Comments.
the key issues in coming up with technologies and products for the
Ethical and Social Considerations in Testing: Ethical Issues in
marginalized, including user needs and context analysis, ideation
Behavioral Assessment. User Qualifications and Professional
involving user interaction and co-creation, and assessment of the
Competence, Responsibility of Test Publishers, Protection of Privacy,
potential of technology for success.
Confidentiality and Communicating Test Results.
HUL706 Language, Society and Culture
HUL712 Microeconomics
3 Credits (2-1-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Psycho-linguistics and sociolinguistics; culture and identity studies;
studies in expressive culture: idea-systems, myths and archtypes. Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: HUL212&HUL311
223

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
This course provides an introduction to microeconomic theory and The course aims to formalize microeconomic treatment of industry
is the first course in the microeconomic theory series. The course and firm's behaviour, decision-making in consumer's choice problems,
will begin with detailed analysis of consumer’s choice behavior and rationality theory (as well as its exceptions). Emphasis will be put
required mathematical tools from optimization theory and real analysis to conceptualize various aspects of firm's and consumer's choice.
would be reviewed. Producer’s behavior is analyzed next where Market structures, pricing under alternative market structures, market
emphasis is put on characterization results under different market power and concentration will also form an integral part of the course.
structures, especially strategic aspects in an oligopolistic market. Behavioural and strategic aspects of the agents would be emphasized
The next topic is analysis of decision-making under uncertainty and in various cases e.g. auctions, economic networks etc.
Anscombe-Aumann framework is introduced. Next non-expected
utility theories are covered, Topics of recent and relevant interest HUL717 perspectives on Indian Economy
will also be covered if time permits.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL713 Macroeconomics Pre-requisite(s): Any ONE of: HUL211, HUL212, HUL213,
3 Credits (3-0-0) HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320
This course discusses the various phases in India’s development
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students--any ONE of: HUL211,
transition. They include the economic changes during the colonial
HUL212, HUL213, HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL315, HUL318,
period, development under the planning regime, the transition from
HUL320 state to markets in India, and economic growth under liberalization.
This course begins with a detailed study of macroeconomic concepts, The course will deal with the varied inequalities in the country, along
which include an analysis of India’s national income and balance the lines of caste, class, and gender, as well as across regions. It
of payments data. It provides an understanding of the contending will feature issues related to Indian agriculture, industry, services, as
theories of employment, income distribution, money supply, and well as trade and investment. The course will aim to provide various
price-wage relationships. The course also deals with exchange points of view on each of these topics.
rates and other open economy macro issues. It discusses the
classical and neoclassical theories of the macroeconomy, as also the HUL718 political Economy of Development
critiques of these theories by Keynes, Kalecki, and their followers.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course examines macroeconomic policies, and the challenges
faced by governments and the Central Banks in implementing them, Pre-requisite(s): Any ONE of: HUL211, HUL212, HUL213,
especially in the context of the integrated nature of global finance HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320, HUL271, HUL272,
and production. HUL275, HUL281, HUL286, HUL289, HUL310
The course will be a survey on the theories and issues related to the
HUL714 International Economics
political economy of development. It discusses the emergence of
3 Credits (3-0-0) industrial capitalism in Europe and North America, as well as its spread
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students--any ONE of: HUL211, to third world countries since the mid-twentieth century. The course
will deal with contemporary issues such as the growth of international
HUL212, HUL213, HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320
trade and finance, the emergence of China as a global economic
This course discusses the various theories on trade, including the
power, and the crisis in global capitalism that deepened since 2008.
Ricardian and Heckscher-Ohlin models. It deals with instruments of
Issues related to human development, labour rights, migration and
trade policies, and also the political economy issues such as trade
environmental sustainability will also be covered.
agreements under the WTO. It examines how international trade
affect developing countries, with a particular emphasis on the Indian
case. Further, the course will trace the emergence of the international HSL719 Advanced Econometrics
monetary system, including the international gold standard and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
the Bretton Woods system. The ascent of global finance and its
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: HUL315 / HUL215
implications for macroeconomic policymaking will be covered in this
course. Theories on finance, financial regulation and financial crises Course contents (about 100 words) (Include laboratory/design
will also be discussed in this course. activities):
1. Review of Classical Linear Regression Model: Gauss-Markov
HUL715 Time Series Econometrics and Forecasting assumptions, finite sample properties, large sample properties.
3 Credits (3-0-0) 2. Instrumental Variable Estimation: Motivation for instrumentation,
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: HUL315 / HUL215 Simultaneity Bias, Endogeneity and Measurement Error; IV
Estimation; 2SLS Estimation.
1. Stationary Univariate Models : (a) Difference equation; (b) Wold's
decomposition; (c) ARMA models; d. Box-Jenkins methodology; (e) 3. Generalized Method of Moments: Single equation linear GMM.
Model Selection; (f) Forecasting.
4. Systems of Equations: Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SUR)
2. Non-stationary univariate models: (a) Trend/cyclical decomposition; model; Simultaneous Equations Models: Identification.
(b) Deterministic and stochastic trend models; (c) Unit root tests;
5. Panel Data models: Pooled Estimation; Unobserved Heterogeneity:
(d) Stationarity tests.
Fixed vs. Random Effects; ML vs. GMM estimation.
3. Structural change and non-linear models: (a) Test for structural
change with unknown change point; (b) Estimation of linear models 6. Discrete Choice Models: Binary response models, Multinomial
with structural change; (c) Regime switching models. Response Models, Ordered Response Models.
4. Stationary multivariate models; (a) Dynamic simulteneous equation 7. Censored Regression Models: Estimation and Inference with
models; (b) Vector Auto Regression (VAR); (c) Granger causality; (d) Censored Tobit.
Impulse response function. 8. Estimating Average Treatment Effects: Regression Methods,
5. Non-stationary multivariate models: (a) Spurious regression; (b) Methods Based on the Propensity Score, Estimating the ATE Using IV.
Co-integration; (c) Vector Error Correction (VECM) model.
6. Time series model of heteroskedasticity: (a) ARCH, GARCH models. HUL720 Development Economics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL716 Industrial Economics
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students--any ONE of: HUL211,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL212, HUL213, HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL315, HUL318,
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: HUL212 & HUL311 HUL320
224

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
This course discusses experiences in economic growth and noting the ontological and epistemological assumptions and values
development transitions from around the world. Some of the topics of reflexivity and subjectivity. We then learn about planning and
that will be covered in this course include poverty, inequality, designing qualitative research and consider the sampling requirements
education, health, and gender aspects of development. The course will and ethical concerns. Various data collection techniques will be
deal with history and persistence in development, as well as with the introduced, such as interviews, focus group, textual data: surveys,
roles of agrarian institutions and credit markets. Other topics covered diaries, secondary sources. Finally, we will learn to analyze the
will include culture, social capital, behavior, corruption, violence and qualitative data, focusing on three different approaches - thematic
conflict. The impacts of international trade, foreign aid, and foreign analysis, discourse analysis, and interpretative phenomenological
investment on development will also feature in this course. analysis. Teamwork and interactive exercises will be emphasized.
Students will gain hands-on experience in various qualitative methods
HSL721 Research Methods in Cognitive Science and analysis techniques. Students will also be introduced to NVivo – a
3 Credits (1-0-4) widely used qualitative analysis software.
In the module for qualitative methods, we will start by discussing
the qualitative research paradigm, noting the ontological and HSL726 Culture and Cognition
epistemological assumptions and values of reflexivity and subjectivity. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
We then learn about planning and designing qualitative research and
Pre-requisite(s): HSL521
consider the sampling requirements and ethical concerns.
Introduction: culture and cognition; the cultural foundations of
In the module for experimental methods, we will first introduce the
cognition: basic cognitive processes- perceiving, attending, framing,
assumptions behind experimentation and the defining its nature and
classifying, generalizing, symbolizing and memory; research
scope. We will then introduce topics such as control, randomization,
methodology relevant to the field; cultural studies & comparative
design, factors, etc. that will equip the students to understand and
designs; belief systems, ideology and culture: examining folk beliefs,
test a scientific prediction using experimentation. The module will
social axioms and scientific concepts (their use and abuse), identity
be a mix of lectures and practical sessions. Practical sessions will
construction- individual and collective and micro-level cultural
complement core concepts taught in the lectures by allowing the
practices and social transformation; toward a cognitive theory of
students to design their own experiment, collect data and do some
culture: the sharing of culture & the exploration of cultural differences,
preliminary analysis.
public & private culture: the emergence of shared meaning, cultural
Finally, in the module for computational methods, we will introduce diversity & cognition, acculturation, polycultural psychology;
the students to some examples of data analytics and basic machine cultural competence, combining strength: toward a new science
learning models. of culture, schemata, cultural models, & consensus; problems and
issues, the idea of geography of thought, subjective culture, cross-
HSL722 Data Analysis for Behavioral Research using R cultural explorations and issues of authenticity and measurement of
4 Credits (3-0-2) cultural concepts; perspectives on indigenous psychology, diversity
in Indian culture & cognition; latest research in the field & future
Pre-requisite(s): HUL 242 and HSL 745 for UG and non-HUSS,
directions.
PG students.
The course will comprise of 4 broad themes. In the 1st part of the
HUL731 What is a Text
course, we will introduce the basics of R. R syntax and its libraries will
be extensively used for other parts of the course. In the 2nd part, we 3 Credits (3-0-0)
will introduce basics of statistics that are needed for understanding We will study the fundamental assumptions supporting the various
ideas of frequentist-based hypothesis testing methods. This will definitions of text, and their possible mutual incompatibility, for the
include understanding t-test, linear regressions and basics of linear- ways in which the question “what is a text” exposes the issues in
mixed models. characterizing, interpreting and attributing meaning to text. The
course will take into account hermeneutic, phenomenological and
HSL723 Advanced Computational Methods deconstructionist theories of text, the historicality of the idea of text,
1.5 Credits (0.5-0-2) the distinctions between text and work, the metaphysics of text and
its epistemological status, and the possibility of classifying kinds of
Pre-requisite(s): HSL721
text. It will also consider the different cultural ways of producing,
We will first introduce the students to the basics of computational circulating and relating to texts.
modeling. We will discuss examples of computational models and the
question of what can be learnt. Students will be introduced to two HUL732 Contemporary Critical Theory
learning algorithms: decision trees and logistic regression. They will
3 Credits (3-0-0)
learn about validation of their models, both internally and externally.
During the course practical, they will get the opportunity to train their Pre-requisite(s): For Ph.D. students: No prerequisites for all
own computational models to solve a simple problem. other students: Any one of the following: HUL331, HUL332,
HUL333, HUL334, HUL335, HUL336, HUL337, HUL338, HUL339,
HSL724 Advanced Experimental Methods
HUL340
1.5 Credits (0.5-0-2)
A particular theoretical position would be explored through the
Pre-requisite(s): HSL721 detailed study of selected work which trace the history of the
We will first summarize the basics of experimentation. Following development of that critical position. The study would also include
this, we will focus on a particular experimental paradigm (e.g., Eye- the analysis of a text which would illustrate the critical position
tracking, EEG) where the key concepts related to the paradigm will being studied.
be discussed. Some research papers that have used this paradigm Detailed course contents would be announced by the course
in domains such as attention, language processing, etc. will be coordinator at the time of offering the course.
discussed. Advantages and challenges to the paradigm will be
discussed. In addition, practical sessions will be conducted to get a HUL733 Study of an Author/Writer in Focus
hands-on experience on a particular paradigm.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HSL725 Advanced Qualitative Methods • Brief biography and study of the historical/social context of the
selected writer • Intellectual milieu of the writer • Overview of the
1.5 Credits (0.5-0-2)
major works and overall trajectory of the development of his/her
Pre-requisite(s): HSL721 thought • Understanding the influences and impact of the work/s
We will start by discussing the qualitative research paradigm, • Detailed study of the selected text/s.
225

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
HUL734 Themes in Modern Indian Thought pidgin and creole formation etc.) as explained by feature-based and
3 Credits (3-0-0) parameter-based grammars, as well by socio-cultural-political factors.
The focus will then shift towards how homogenization of language
This course will focus on significant themes in modern Indian
also happens - combating the natural tendency towards variation -
thought (Equality, Freedom, Sexuality, Gender, Caste, Religion,
triggered by external factors. Concepts of race, gender, nation and
Violence, Modernity, Education, the Arts etc) and introduce students
identity will also be brought up to show the pervasive role of language
to major works that engage the specific theme(s) that have been
in varied aspects of our socio-cultural-political lives.
chosen. Works studied may be cinematic, theatrical, fictional or
non-fictional. The course will study both the genealogy of significant
HUL742 Transformational Theories of Language
concepts in modern Indian thought (examining English as well as
3 Credits (3-0-0)
non-English language materials) as well as the range of debate about
these concepts and their deployment. The course is envisaged as Pre-requisite(s): HUL 234, HUL242 and HUL 350 for UG
an interdisciplinary course, though we will pay close attention to students and/or prior permission of the course coordinator
questions of reading, textuality and interpretation. Lecture outline
This course will cover the fundamental concepts that have defined
given for a possible course on gender and sexuality., as ONE possible generative/transformational grammars since their inception in the
example of a theme that could be pursued. 1950s. It will introduce students to the main motivations for such
grammars for natural language, as stated in Chomsky (1957).
HUL735 Research Methods in Economics A substantial part of the course will therefore be devoted to
2 Credits (1-0-2) understanding the inadequacies of immediate constituent analysis
and the need to include optional and obligatory transformational
Pre-requisite(s): Either HUL701 or HUL 707 or HUL736 OR rules in the grammar. This will be followed by a detailed study of later
HUL738 or HUL754 or HUL755 or HUL761 or HUL762 theoretical developments, including those found in Standard Theory,
The course will cover theory and practice of doing applied research Extended Standard Theory, Revised Extended Standard Theory and
in economics, with special emphasis on primary and secondary data Government and Binding Theory.
uses. The course will familiarize students with sampling techniques,
questionnaire design, implementation of field-based studies, including HUL743 Language Acquisition, Teaching and Assessment
randomized controlled trials. Students will be provided training in 3 Credits (3-0-0)
STATA for carrying out data analysis, including use of data sets such
This is a literature review course that will explore the existing
as the National Sample Survey, National Family Health Survey, Indian
literature in the domains of Language Acquisition (both first and
Human Development Survey. Students will be expected to design and
second), Language teaching (approaches and methods), as well as
implement a small study during the course of the semester and will language assessment. In doing so, the course will include aspects
be evaluated on this. of the philosophy of language, and the resultant application of these
philosophical approaches in the form of classroom pedagogy. The
HUL736 planning and Economic Development course will also include substantial literature on "action research"
3 Credits (3-0-0) where language teachers have written about the results of
implementing various cognitive tasks in their classroom.
Economic growth. Economic development. Historic growth
and contemporary development. Lessons and controversies. HUL745 psycholinguistics
Characteristics of developing countries. Obstacles to development.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Structural changes in the process of economic development.
We will first introduce the relevant questions, theories, methodologies
Relationship between agriculture and industry. Strategies of economic
with regard to the historical trajectory of Psycholinguistics. We will
development. Balanced/ Unbalanced growth. International trade
then look at language processing at different linguistic dimensions.
and economic development. Population. Planning for economic
We will start with words, their meaning and access. We then look
development. Use of input-output model and linear programming
at processing sentences. The course will also cover important topics
techniques in planning. Indian plan experience. Strategy of Indian
such as language and speech production. Reading processes (and
planning. Indian plan models.
its relation to processing) will be covered. We course will also cover
the current theories of Bilingualism and Aphasia.
HUL737 Advanced Economic Growth Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0) HUL746 phonological Markedness
Pre-requisite(s): either HUL736 or HUL738 or HUL755 or 3 Credits (2-0-2)
HUL762 or any other 7XX level economics course. Pre-requisite(s): HUL 234, HUL242 and HUL 350 for UG
Primary objective of this course is to introduce students with the This course explores the connection between a unit of acoustic
process of economic growth and the long run sources of differences speech signal and its environment (sounds preceding or following
in economic performances across nations. Emphasis will be placed on it). Phonological theory is thus composed on context-free and
developing theoretical tool kits in understanding growth mechanics. context-sensitive notions of markedness. While these are supposed
It is intended that this course will make students learn some of the to be universal, individual languages might vary significantly in
workhorse models in modern macroeconomics, namely, Solow model, prioritizing between these. The course therefore involves a major
Neo-classical model, overlapping generations’ model, models with practical component where the speech units of individual languages
technological change and technology adoption etc. (vowels, consonants and tones) are studied with respect to their
phonological contexts.
HUL741 Sociolinguistics: Language Variation, Culture HSL747 Language Computations and Mental Architecture
and Society
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): HSL521, HSL541
Pre-requisite(s): HUL 234, HUL242 and HUL 350 for UG or Prior
The course starts with a central tenet of language from the perspective
Permission of Coordinator of generative grammar, which is: recursion. We discuss the definition
This course aims at understanding variation mainly from a of recursion, differences between direct and indirect recursion, and
sociolinguistics perspective, but while also considering some relevant its correlates to actual biological processes. We then move on to
cues from generative views of the phenomenon. It will cover aspects discuss if the same property defines other communicative systems,
of language change (bilingualism, multilingualism, language deaths, including those of non-human primates, insects and birds. Drawing
226

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
on studies conducted on tamarin monkeys, ants, bees and zebra HUL752 philosophy of Social Sciences
finches, we try to answer if the structure of the human mind is 3 Credits (3-0-0)
different from non-human minds, and if so, how. Are computational
Some of the key issues which arise in Social Sciences will be discussed
processes any less or more complex in the two sets of minds under
in this course. These are : (1) What is ‘out there’ in the social universe?
consideration here? Some overarching themes running through
(2) What are the most fundamental properties of the social world?
the course are: (i) how does the nature-nurture debate play out
(3) What kind(s) of analysis of these properties is (are) possible
in human and non-human linguistic systems, (ii) which parameters
result from maturational processes that are innately specified, and and/ or appropriate ? (4) What are the natures of theory, law, and
which parameters are acquired by learning, (iii) whether the mental explanation ? (5) Problems of reductionism. (6) Problems of free will
space is carved into modular compartments, where each module versus determinism, purposeful behaviour, interpretations of actions.
is an adaptive specialization to a particular problem or whether a (7) Philosophical issues specific to various Social Sciences, e.g.,
non-modular mind serves as a general-purpose learning mechanism, philosophical bases of various economic theories, or of theories of
(iv) what are the determinants of errors and (v) the constraints on psychology, or issues regarding the assumptions concerning human
imitation and production of language constructs when placed in nature made by various social science disciplines.
contact or non-ideal situations.
HUL753 philosophy of Science
HUL748 Community psychology 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (2-1-0) The course will address three sorts of questions. The first set
Concept of community and their implications for community involves the status of science as a privileged source of knowledge:
psychology. Community processes and orientations toward what, if anything, justifies this status? The second set involves
change. Examinations of the models; the mental health model; concepts such as 'law' , 'cause', and 'explanation' which occur within
the organizational model; the social action model; the ecological scientific practice: how are these to be understood? The third set
model. Implications for a psychology of the community : the study involves understanding the relationship between different scientific
of community life, interaction strategies; implications for manpower enterprises: is there a hierarchy of sciences ranging from physics at
and training; family therapy and the community; crisis intervention; one end to the human or social sciences at the other? If so, how
advocacy and community psychology. should this hierarchy be understood?
HSL748 Natural Language Understanding HUL754 The philosophy of plato
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3.0 Credits (3-0-0)
This is a survey of Plato's thinking about politics, ethics, epistemology,
Pre-requisite(s): HSL522, or similar programming course, or
and metaphysics. We will focus on a careful and critical reading of
instructor consent
the primary texts, and attempt to get a sense both of their historical
This course is designed as an introduction to the field of computational
and cultural specificity, as well as their interest more generally as
linguistics with a focus on linguistically motivated models of natural
sources of philosophical insight.
language understanding. It will cover text processing starting from
the word level analysis to sentence level parsing. The assignments will
HUL755 Fascism: philosophical perspectives
be in the form of short programs designed to solve specific problems
in processing text data. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fascism is one of the pernicious forms of power that emerged in the
HSL749 Optimality Theory and Harmonic Grammar 19th and 20th century and posed a serious to challenge democratic
forms of life. The course will discuss the philosophical understanding
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of power, state, law, sovereignty and freedom with the special focus
Pre-requisite(s): For UGs: HUL242, HUL350, HUL381 and on gaining a conceptual grasp on fascism. Some of the classical and
HUL234 contemporary philosophers who have directly or indirectly contributed
The objective of this course is to study two models of constraint based towards constructing the intellectual edifice of fascism will be studied.
grammars: namely Optimality Theory and Harmonic Grammar. While Philosophical criticisms of fascism and the ethical and political
OT ranks constraints with respect to each other leading to a direct explorations of resistance and the possibility of alternative forms of
conflict between competing constraints, Harmonic Grammar positions power and governance will also be studied. The bio politics of fascism,
these on a linear scale according to their weights. its relationship with Nazism, racism and religious and other forms of
fanaticism, and the aestheticization of politics will also be covered.
HSL750 Acoustic phonetics
HUL756 philosophy and Film
3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): None
This course develops the conceptual resources of philosophy to
The course includes the following topics:
respond to the cinematic image. The topics include: Ontology of
• Acoustic phonetics: Speech sound production, transmission
the cinematic Image; cognitive and phenomenological approaches
and perception; Acoustic properties of frequency, amplitude and
to perception and imagination; relationship between representation
waveform.
and reality and between seeing and saying; space, time and image;
• Tools and techniques: Waveform analysis; Spectral analysis. movement and animation, memory, history, narrative; anthropology
• Vowel, Consonants and Suprasegmental acoustics: There of images, truth in cinema; Cinema as art; Cinema’s relationship to
is also a practical component of hands-on experiment to train in painting and literature; cinema and technology, the digital image.
data collection, analysis and interpretation.
HUL759 Urban Social Systems
HUL751 Critical Reading in philosophical Texts 3 Credits (2-1-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) This course intends to impart a comprehensive and systematic
The instructor will select a seminal text in philosophy and read it along understanding of urban social systems. Students completing this
with the class. Emphasis will be given to the textual material and course will have a detailed knowledge of urban-growth and urban
issues in reading and understanding. An overview of the following will behaviour analysis, and urban- planning through a feedback analysis
be provided: The nature the text, specificity of philosophical texts, text approach.
and context, issues in translation, interpretation and understanding. Following will be the main course contents: Nature, types and growth
227

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
of cities, Some important aspects of urban-systems: migration; Assessment; Ethical and Social Considerations in Testing; Ethical
neighbourhood; social groups; and voluntary associations. Trend Guidelines in Behavioral Assessment.
of urbanisation. Urban influences on rural areas. A profile of urban
India and its problems. Solution of the problems through various HSL766 Advances in Social Cognition
approaches. Urban planning.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): HSL661 (for MSc Cognitive Science students)
HUL760 Industry and Society
The courses will focus on the following: Social foundations of
3 Credits (2-1-0)
cognition, cognitive
The basic aim of this course is to introduce students from various
and affective biases, automaticity and control, contagion, moral
backgrounds scientists, technologists to the study and understanding
cognition, cognition among oppressed groups, the dynamics of
of modern industrial societies. The course material will focus on the
variable self, discursive approaches to cognition, current controversies
following topics.
and future directions.
Nature and type of industrial society. Workers in modern industrial
societies: the work situation; alienation; and embourgeoisement.
White collar worker. Trade-unionisation. Industrial democracy. Labour- HSL767 Emotion and Decision making
management relations in Indian industries. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will cover theoretical perspectives in affect science
HUL761 Theories of psychology (e.g., valence-arousal, risk, motivation) and decision science (e.g.,
3 Credits (3-0-0) dual processes, frame-dependency), with applications of affect and
decision-making (e.g. consumption behavior).
The course will provide a history of the discipline of psychology
and its evolution over the years. Major schools of psychology will
be discussed. The key theories -psychoanalytic theory, the various HSL768 Judgment and Decision Making
learning theories, theories of emotion and cognition, humanistic 3 Credits (3-0-0)
approaches and evolutionary perspective will be the focus. Social
Pre-requisite(s): For MSc Cognitive Science students: Cognitive
psychology theories, cognitive and neuroscience perspectives and
Processes: From Labs to Fields For PhD (HuSS) or other PhD
positive psychology theories will be discussed in detail.
students: With the instructor’s approval for PhD students
HUL762 Social Issues: Analysis and policy without backgrounds in psychology/cognitive science/
management/design
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Models of judgments under uncertainty, heuristics, Choices under
The courses will focus on the following: Social psychological theory
certainty and under uncertainty, Intertemporal choice, Computational
and application, examine the various methods of research, examine
models, Embodied decision making).
some social psychology applications and evaluate them. Issues of
Inequality, deprivation and justice, in the context of Intergroup
relations, Psychology of legitimacy, Violence, reconciliation and peace HSL769 Number Cognition
will be examined. Environment and energy conservation issues and 4 Credits (3-0-2)
applied research and the criminal justice system will be critically
Pre-requisite(s): HSL661 (for MSc Cognitive Science students)
examined. Social psychology and social policy implications will be
discussed. Representation and processing of numbers in our brains, mental
number line, cognitive processing of numbers and magnitudes,
randomness and chance, mental arithmetic, nonsymbolic processing
HUL763 Cognitive psychology
of magnitudes, intuitive sense of numbers.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will cover the following topics: Historical account of HUL771 Sociological Theory
brain-mind, classification of cognition theories, methods of studying
3 Credits (3-0-0)
cognition, visual perception, top-down-bottom-up processing, visual
recognition, information processing theories and attention, long-term This is an advanced course that introduces students to a range of
memory, three stage theory of memory, types of memory, working classical and contemporary sociological theory.
memory and executive processing, emotion-cognition, decision
making and dual process theories. HSV771 Ethnographic Research Methods
1 Credit (1-0-0)
HUL764 psychological Interventions
This module introduces students to the theory and practice of
3 Credits (3-0-0) ethnography. Issue of representation, objectivity and experience
Introduction: Psychological Intervention modules including Yoga & render challenges to the presumed ‘objectivity’ of social science
Meditation; relevant research methods of the field specifically for research. The module engages with debates on ethnographic
intervention programmes development and evaluation -research representation from the early development of anthropology through
design, testing, evaluation of results etc.; Broad objectives of the field; to feminist, postcolonial and postmodern critiques. It addresses
Intervention programmes in the various field of psychology: Applied questions of ethics and subjectivity in the conduct of ethnographic
positive psychology, health psychology, applied social psychology, fieldwork especially in troubled times of violence or conflict. The
community psychology, cognitive psychology etc.; Meta - analysis module addresses conceptual issues of how to locate the ‘field’ as
research on intervention programmes; Intervention programmes in well as the practice of conducting ethnographic research through
Indian setting and role of socio –cultural factors; Critical evaluation tools such as participant observation and life histories.
and Future orientation of the field.
HUL772 Sociology of India
HUL765 psychological Testing and Behavioral 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Assessment
The major themes covered in this course include the debates on
3 Credits (3-0-0) continuity and change in relation to colonial rule, ideas of tradition
Psychological testing: Uses and Varieties of Psychological Tests, Item and modernity, models of development, agrarian structure and rural
Analysis, Norms and the Meaning of Tests Scores; Reliability and its transformation, marriage and family, caste and kinship, secularism,
Types; Validity and its Basic Concepts; Steps for Test Construction, Subaltern religion and religious conflict, class and social mobility. The
Test adaptation and revalidation; Other Techniques of Behavioral course takes a critical and engaged perspective on concepts such as
228

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
the village, family, caste, region, nation, language, religion, gender, of science, theories of standardization and objectivity. Historical and
class, development, tradition, indigenousness, tribe, modernisation contemporary debates on scientific and indigenous knowledge from
and others. Various approaches that have influenced the study of India and the world, relationship between science and the state, and
Indian society such as Orientalism, Indology, Structuralism, Structural- role of experts and the public in evaluating and regulating science.
Function Subaltern Studies will also be discussed.
HUL778 Urban Sociology
HUL773 Media, Culture and Society 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) This seminar course critically examines the production of urban space
The course examines contemporary manifestations of the 'media- and culture. The ‘urban’ denotes an aspect of physical space as much
event', the 'spectacle' and the fetishism of the image-object in as a way of life and a mentality. A critical reading of ethnographic
determining the collective consciousness of our times. How are studies on the city provides a cross-cultural perspective on how space
'media-events' created? What is the role of the media (this includes becomes culturally meaningful. The rise of the urban centre and
mass media, advertisements, as well as social and digital media) in metropolis are the product of a certain historical moment, yet they also
determining the nature of the 'self' and 'society.'? How do media-trials produce distinctive mentalities and cultures that are unique to them.
alter the manner in which we relate to issues of justice and fairness? The course will explore the structuring and contestation of urban
What is the manifestation of social movements in a media-saturated space through categories of class, ethnicity, status and gender and
age? How do we recalibrate our understanding of privacy and what study the city as the location of discourses of and struggles for
does this do to the ways in which we can create ever-changing and citizenship.
newer 'selves'? These questions will be examined through case studies
from South Asia and beyond. HUL779 Gender and Society
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL774 Visual Methods in Social Research
Sex and gender; masculinities, gender as performance and identity;
3 Credits (3-0-0) sexuality and gender identities, masculinity and femininity. Hegemonic
The course analyses visual material in cross-cultural contexts and how masculinity; Inter-sections of gender and race, ethnicity, caste and
the Internet in particular is being used to disseminate information class. Institutionalization of gender via the state, family, marriage,
and (re)present content. Importance of visual research methods; religion etc.; the political economy of gender relating to reproduction,
visuals as texts and framing; representing images and images in care, work and property. Issues of gender inequality, patriarchal
social research; Internet and online ethnography; analyzing websites oppression, violence, voice and agency.
- qualitative content; politics of digital culture.
HSL780 Social and Cultural Construction of Emotions
HUL775 Agrarian Societies and Rural Development 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): HSL661 (for MSc Cognitive Science students).
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: Any ONE course from HUL The courses will focus on the following: Introduction: understanding
271, HUL 272, HUL 275, HUL 281, HUL 286, HUL 371, HUL social and cultural construction of emotions, models of emotion
372, HUL 375, HUL 376, HUL 377, HUL 378 OR HUL 380 OR appraisal and regulation, emotion as discourse, social neuroscience of
any new 200 or 300 level Sociology course floated in future. emotions, group-based emotions, specific emotions: anger, guilt and
For PG students: None shame, schadenfreude, disgust and humiliation, cultural differences
in emotion.
The course will introduce students to theories related to agriculture
and development including modernization theory, the rational
HSL781 potential and perils of the Digital Welfare
peasant, moral economy, the agrarian question, modes of production
debates, peasantry as a class, etc. Readings from the history of 3.0 Credits (3-0-0)
agriculture in various countries including the United States, Asia, Africa Introduce students to critical perspectives on the potential and perils
and India will be taught in comparative perspective. The course will of digital welfare. The sectors it has disrupted, its contribution, its
help students understand the economic, social, cultural, ecological, fallouts. The course will look at the role of big data and data mining
political dimensions to the agrarian question, especially in the light in the rise of the digital economy. Using big data and data mining
of urbanization and globalization over the last 150 years. as a lens, the effort is to think harder, and understand better, the
connections between the economy, technology, welfare, society,
HUL776 Capitalism: Theory and Development corporations and democracy.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL782 perspectives on Development in India
What is capitalism and how did it emerge? What are its strengths
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and weaknesses? How have the social scientists analysed it and
understood its implications for and relationship with other social Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: ONE course out of (HUL 212,
phenomena? Addressing these questions, this course discusses the HUL 213, HUL 311, HUL 312, HUL 314, HUL 315, HUL 316, HUL
historical development of capitalist institutions and social relations 318, HUL 320 OR any new 200 level or 300 level Economics
in the context of the advanced industrial and developing societies.
Courses floated in future) AND ONE course out of (HUL 271,
Particularly, it analyses the various theories and paradigms of
HUL 272, HUL 275, HUL 281, HUL 286
capitalistic development, such as the Marxist political economy,
classical liberalism, world systems theory, economic history and neo- This seminar course will undertake a critical examination of the
liberalism. Furthermore, it analyses the relationship between the state development process in India. The course introduces students to a
and market, capitalism and liberal democracy, the religious roots of historical overview of social, economic and political issues related
capitalism, social embeddedness of economic activity, and the ‘new to the ideas of development and growth. Starting from notions of
realities’ of capitalism, such as displacement, inequality and rampant improvement mooted under the colonial regime, to the processes of
environmental degradation. planning in independent India, the radical new agrarian policy of the
1960s and 70s, down to the era of liberalization in the 1990s and
beyond, the course familiarises students with the political economy
HUL777 Sociology of Science
of development in India. It uses inter-disciplinary sources and texts
3 Credits (3-0-0) to expose students to multiple ways of understanding and analyzing
Basic theories in the sociology of science such as functionalism, problems. Other topics covered include poverty and inequality,
the theory of paradigm shift, social construction of scientific facts, economics of discrimination (gender and caste) and the conflicts
stratification and discrimination in science, feminist epistemologies over land and natural resources in the 21st century.
229

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
HUL783 Science, Technology and Society Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses in
3 Credits (3-0-0) the first year. For UG students--any ONE of: HUL212, HUL213,
Introduction to the discipline of Science and Technology Studies HUL311, HUL312, HUL211, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320
covering topics such as the technological determinism, social The course aims to develop an understanding of the process of
construction of technology (SCOT), actor-network theory, laboratory economic growth and income distribution in an economy. Historical
studies, scientific controversies, the theory of paradigm shift, and contemporary experiences of countries on growth and
social construction of knowledge, feminist theories of science developmental outcomes will be dealt with in this course. The impacts
and technology, the idea of technoscience, risk society, ethics in of capital accumulation, technological progress, and international
engineering, and the role of experts and the public in evaluating and trade on economic performance will be discussed. Further, this course
regulating the production of science and technology. will focus on how global capital movements, domestic institutions
and political economy can affect economic growth and development.
HSL784 Working with Humanities Data
3 Credits (2-0-2) HSL812 Advanced International Trade
Pre-requisite(s): COL100 or equivalent. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Students will be introduced to specialized packages and techniques Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)--
for working with humanities data in both structured and unstructured Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses in
forms. The course will also introduce students to standalone digital
the first year. For UG students--any ONE of: HUL212, HUL213,
humanities tools like Voyant, Gephi and Palladio. The lectures will
HUL311, HUL312, HUL211, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320
introduce debates on shapes that data centred humanities research
The contents of this course will include topics such as - Ricardian and
can take through a study of leading projects in the field. Students
Hecksher-Ohlin models, their extension to many goods and factors,
will also learn about the concepts of creative commons and fair use.
the role of tariffs, quotas, and other trade policies, trade under
imperfect competition, outsourcing, political economy, multinationals,
HSL789 Religion and Modern Society
trade and growth, gravity equation, organization of the firms, etc.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
What is religion? What role does it play in modern democratic
HSL813 Foundations of Decision Theory
societies? How does it influence the everyday life-world, belief
3 Credits (3-0-0)
system, and identity of an individual or a community? And, what
are the relationships between the sacred and secular or religion and Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)--
modernity? Addressing these questions, this course examines the Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses
various concepts, theories and debates in the sociology/anthropology in the first year. For UG students--HUL212
of religion. Contrary to the predictions of the secularisation hypothesis,
The course aims to formalize microeconomic treatment of decision-
which envisaged the decline or privatisation of religion with the
making by economic agents. It will encompass consumer's choice
spread of modernity and techno-scientific rationality, it is observed
problems, rationality theory and also bounded rationality theory.
that there is a religious resurgence or de-secularisation of the world.
The course will conceptualize behavioural aspects of firm's decision-
Religion has assumed a more public role. Given this, the course will
making- non-cooperation strategies and cartel formation would be
examine the implications of religion’s resurgence and active public
discussed with respect to various market structures. Basic ideas
role for modern democratic societies as well as the broader process
of auction models would also be discussed and reference would
of social order and social change.
be made to e-auctions and spectrum (or natural resource) auction
markets. Latest developments in social and economic networks would
HUL800 Research Writing
be introduced and behavioural underpinnings would be discussed.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will include aspects of writing composition and stylistics HUL814 Research Methods in Economics
that are essential to write a coherent research paper/abstract.
2 Credits (1-0-2)
Topics will include text structure, common writing mistakes, ethical
issues, etc. This will be a hands-on course; it will extensively use Pre-requisite(s): For M.Tech.: Any two of the following HUL712,
in-class exercises (as well as assignments) to help students learn HUL713, HUL714, HUL715, HUL716, HUL717, HUL718, HSL719,
the necessary skills. HUL720
For UG: Any two of the following: HUL311, HUL312, HUL314,
HUL801 Law, Technology and Citizenship
HUL316, HUL318, HUL320, HUL712, HUL713, HUL714, HUL715,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL716, HUL717, HUL718, HSL719
Although there has been considerable focus in political theory and
The course will cover theory and practice of doing applied research
legal studies on the concept of citizenship, and its relationship with
in economics, with special emphasis on primary and secondary data
the law, through the last six decades, the study of the importance
uses. The course will familiarize students with sampling techniques,
of technology to this relationship is only an emerging field. Four
questionnaire design, implementation of field-based studies, including
performative sites of citizenship discourse/citizen action viz., (a)
randomized controlled trials. Students will be provided training in
human rights approaches and the regulation of technology, (b)
STATA for carrying out data analysis, including use of data sets such
Surveillance state and citizenship, (c) Technological ethics as a site
as the National Sample Survey, National Family Health Survey, Indian
for citizenship discourse, and d) Posthuman citizen, are focused
Human Development Survey. Students will be expected to design and
upon to offer possible (conceptual and practical) implications for the
implement a small study during the course of the semester and will
ways in which ‘law and technology’ impacts existing rights discourse.
be evaluated on this.
Further, four important sites of contemporary debates on technology
and citizenship, viz., UID/Aadhaar, Human DNA profiling for crime
control, nuclear technology and genetically modified technologies in HSL815 Theory of Market Design
agriculture are focussed on to contextualise the key issues that are 3 Credits (3-0-0)
identified in the earlier modules.
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)--
Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses
HSL811 Advanced Economic Growth Theory
in the first year. For UG students--HUL212
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course primarily contains discussions on cooperative game
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)-- theory, mechanism design and implementation theory.
230

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
HSL816 Game Theory HSL822 Advanced Data Analysis for Behavioral
3 Credits (3-0-0) Research Using R
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)-- 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses Pre-requisite(s): HSL722
in the first year. For UG students--HUL212 The course will comprise of 3 broad themes. In the 1st part of the
The course formalizes the initial concepts of game theory, such as course, we will introduce some advanced topics/packages in R. In the
normal form games, existence, computation, extensive form games 2nd part, we will show how to use linear mixed-effect models from
etc. After the introduction of these tools, economic examples in the perspective of frequentist statistics. The 3rd section will introduce
industrial organization and market design would be discussed in details. the basics of Bayesian statistics and show how to fit hierarchical
models from a bayesian perspective for data such as comprehension
HSL817 Health Economics accuracy, reaction times, ratings, etc.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL823 Contemporary Critical Theory
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)-- 3 Credits (2-1-0)
Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses in
Recent developments in linguistics, philosophy and the social sciences;
the first year. For UG students--any ONE of: HUL212, HUL213, interdisciplinary cross-talk in these areas, concerning the status of
HUL311, HUL312, HUL211, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320 canonical literary as well as marginal texts; feminist, post-modernist,
The course shall cover the role of health in economic development, post-colonial, subaltern, orientalist, new historicist, liberal Marxist and
measurement and determinants of health status, health as critical practice. The aim of the course is to familiarise students with
a consumption and investment good, the concept of health some of the vocabulary of theoretical inquiry today, so that they are
production function, the demand for health and health care, enabled in their own research to question the verities which their
estimation of the demand for health, the supply of health, public disciplines seem to offer.
and private provisioning, health care financing, health insurance,
and health policy. The focus of the course shall be on health HUL831 Authorship and Copyright
outcomes and health care of the people in developing countries, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
specifically, India.
Pre-requisite(s): No prerequisite for Ph.D. For UG any ONE of
the following: HUL331, HUL332, HUL333, HUL334, HUL335,
HSL818 Labour Economics
HUL336, HUL338, HUL340, HUL351, HUL352, HUL353, HUL354,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL355, HUL356, HUL357, HUL358, HUL359, HUL360, HUL375
Pre-requisite(s): For HES students (M.Sc. in Economics)--
The course would study the history of the print while keeping in
Completion of core courses. Not allowed to take this courses in
perspective the changes in transmission of knowledge brought about
the first year. For UG students--any ONE of: HUL212, HUL213, by changes in technologies of representation – oral, manuscript, print.
HUL311, HUL312, HUL211, HUL314, HUL318, HUL320 The coming of print is accompanied by the regulation of knowledge
In the first part of the course, we study neoclassical models of labour circulation by systems of profit. This amalgamation leads to the
market and in the second part we introduce search theoretic models. emergence of the idea of copyright which is further strengthened by the
The modules examine how workers, firms, and the government conceptualisation of the author as a genius. The course will study the
interact in the labour market. The focus here will be on the theories prospects of the concepts of the author and copyright in the digital age.
of wage determination, investment in human capital, labour market
discrimination, and job search. The course content is based on recent HUL832 South Asian Writing
research articles on these topics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course will include discussions on the place of the English
HUL820 Advanced Topics in Economics
language and “imported” literary forms in South Asia, the fragmented
3 Credits (3-0-0) and divided terrain of the South Asian city/nation, the figure of the
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students-any ONE of: HUL211, expatriate writer, and the context within which to understand the
HUL212, HUL213, HUL215, HUL311, HUL312, HUL314, HUL315, stylistic and narrative aspects of this writing. It will undertake detailed
analyses of the works of 3-4 writers, out of a longer list comprising
HUL318, HUL320
Anita Desai, G V Desani, Salman Rushdie, Amitav Ghosh, Vikram
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Economics
Seth, Kiran Nagarkar, Aravind Adiga, Jeet Thayyil, Mohammed Hanif,
as decided by the instructor.
Mohsin Hamid, Shyam Sevadurai, Romesh Gunesekhera, and others.
HUL821 performance/Theatre: Theory and practice HUL833 The English Renaissance: Selfhood and Survival
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course would introduce students to the theories of The idea of the Renaissance, the historical, political and social context
performance and a selection of theatrical practices. Reading theatrical
The idea of the self and how it was conceived of during this period
perspectives on the study of performances, alongside studying the
as different from previous notions The importance of the stage and
development of theatre practices and the insights offered by various
theatre in Elizabethan England Shakespeare, Marlow and other
theatre practitioners would prepare the student for studying the
dramatists Milton, John Donne and other poets.
performative.
HUL834 Literature and the City
HSL821 Eye Movement and Cognitive processes
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
The course examines in some detail the nature of the challenge
Pre-requisite(s): HSL521 that traditionally preoccupied European writers - how to map the
The course will begin with introducing the basics and origins of experience of the modern city, and what representational strategies
eye-movement of the human eye. We will then see how analyzing were adequate for capturing the opacity, the fragmentation, and the
eye movement patterns can provide an insight into various cognitive transitory nature of urban modernity. It goes on to investigate the
processes such as vision, attention, reading, language processing, contemporary postcolonial city in order to understand it in relation
etc. The course will also provide hands-on sessions for handling an to late capitalism, globalization, migration, and postmodern culture,
eye tracker. and the challenges these pose to classic modernity. It begins by
231

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
providing an introduction to some of the most important literature as homonymy and synonymy. The aim of the course is to impart
on the city and the major theoretical debates around it, offering certain theoretical tools to analyze words from any natural language
students a set of conceptual tools with which to approach the city’s data. Since the objective of the course is to learn to analyze natural
incommensurable realities, its problems and its potential. It moves language data, it involves a substantial practical component.
on to a detailed analysis of a number of literary texts, examining
some of the ways in which the disjunctive realities of city-life shape HUL843 Reading and Sentence processing
new modes of experience, creative expression, and solidarity, without 3 Credits (2-1-0)
losing sight of the inequities of gender, culture, class, and race that The course content will cover state-of-the-art models of reading. The
persist and indeed strengthen in the current global economic system. course will situate itself in the larger domain of sentence processing
and address the important question of how reading and sentence
HUL835 Modern Indian Theatre processing are related. Distributed (SWIFT) as well as undistributed
3 Credits (3-0-0) (EZ Reader) attention models will be discussed. Influence of low-level
factors (eg. Word length, word frequency, etc) and contribution of
History of modern Indian theatre through its relationship with colonial
high-level sentential factors on reading patterns will be introduced.
to post-colonial and nationalist concerns. Understanding the concept
Work on Indian languages will be discussed. Finally, models that
of modernity and its contested and changing forms in urban Indian
integrate sentence processing and reading will be taken up.
theatre. Examining the trajectory of modern Indian theatre from the
formation of institutions such as the National School of Drama as well [Note: Once an eyetracker is available, hands on sessions will be
as movements such as IPTA. The negotiation of modern theatre with conducted to run simple reading experiments. See tutorial section
for more details.
its colonial and pre-colonial past – the Theatre of Roots. The impact
and influence of the Parsi Theatre and the Marathi Sangeet Nataks.
HSL844 Computational Models of Meaning
Development and concerns of original English theatre in India. Studies
of individual plays and playwrights within the aesthetic and political 3 Credits (3-0-0)
context of their productions. Pre-requisite(s): HSL522, or a similar programming course,
HUL242 or HSL541, HSL748
HUL836 performance/Theatre: Theory/practice
Models of word and sentence meaning are some of the most crucial
3 Credits (3-0-0)
elements for building intelligent systems for language understanding.
Pre-requisite(s): No Pre-requisite for Ph.D. for UG any one of This course will cover the cognitive underpinnings of computational
the following: HUL333, HUL335 models of word similarity, ontologies such as WordNet and frameworks
The course will look upon performance practices both within and such as Abstract meaning Representation (for sentence meaning).
beyond the theatre viz. the spectacular, the digital media, sports etc. It The course will also examine applications of such models for carrying
will take the students through a variety of performance practices and out natural language processing tasks like inference and entailment.
across the world. The history of the development of performance forms
and conditions of performance would be studied. Special focus would HUL845 Environmental Ethics
be on the theorisation of theatre and performance both by theatre 3 Credits (3-0-0)
practitioners and those emanating from the area of Performance Objectives: To acquaint the student with (a) philosophical concepts
Studies. The role of performance in maintaining and countering underlying thinking about the environmental crisis and (b) the
relations of power would be explored. Students would be required to models of human-nature relationship found in some of the classical
observe, study and analyse live performances as part of the course. philosophical systems of India.
Contents: (a) What is ‘environment’? (b) Conceptual basis for the
HUL840 Advanced Topics in Literature split between ‘nature’ and ‘culture’ (c) Philosophical theories about
3 Credits (3-0-0) the environment: Utilitarianism: Deep Ecology: Ecofeminism. (d)
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Literature Non-humans as recipients of moral consideration (e) Environment
as decided by the instructor. and Gender (f) Environment and Development (g) The Third World
perspective (h) Revisioning Ethics, Metaphysics and Epistemology in
HUL841 Minimalist Architecture of Grammar the light of the above debates.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL846 philosophy and Film
Pre-requisite(s): HUL742: Transformational Theories of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Language Or prior permission of the course co-ordinator
Nature of cinematic representation: Illusion, image, reality. Perception
his is an advanced course in theoretical syntax and will benefit
of image: Analytical, cognitive and phenomenological theories,
students interested in learning more about recent generative syntactic
Interpretation of film: meaning, authorship, Intention, Image and
theories. There are two main objectives of the course: a) to provide
emotional response.
the rationale for the ‘Strong Minimalist Thesis: language as an optimal
Film Theories: Classical theories: Eisenstein, Arnheim, Bazin,
system’; and, b) to learn to generate syntactic structures using fewer
Pudovkin, Contemporary theories: Semiotics, Psychoanalysis,
transformations/operations and features and, with stronger economy
Marxism, Post-structuralism, Feminism, Auteur theory.
considerations. On finishing the course, students will be familiar with
both theoretical (substantive) aspects of the minimalist architecture Aesthetics of Film: Cinema as art, entertainment and technology,
of grammar, as well the technical (methodological) know-how of Cinema’s relationship with literature and other arts, Cinema and Digital
the system. Art, Aesthetics of interactive cinema, Aesthetics of special effects.
HUL842 prosodic Morphology HUL850 Advanced Topics in Linguistics
3 Credits (2-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Linguistics
Pre-requisite(s): HUL 234, HUL242 and HUL 350 for UG
as decided by the instructor.
This course explores the connection between sounds and words.
While the correlation between the meaning and sounds of a word are
HUL851 philosophy of Literature
arbitrary, the string of sounds or phonological shape of words and
other morphological units follow certain universal well-formedness 3 Credits (3-0-0)
principles. While many of these principles derive from the manner The course examines the philosophical bases and problems that define
in which individual languages form rhythmic/ prosodic domains in key literary and literary-theoretical concepts, such as text, context,
speech, some make crucial reference to morphological notions such paratext, literary history, narration, meaning, interpretation, voice,
232

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
style, literary specificity. Through the study texts of philosophy (both of Rationality and Gender Duality; Feminist Epistemology of Science;
Anglo-American and European), literature and literary theory, which Feminist Naturalized Epistemology: Standpoint Theory.
have influenced or responded to each other, the following topics
and questions will be addressed: The ontological status of the text- HUL860 Advanced Topics in philosophy
context discontinuity; Through what concept of difference do we
3 Credits (3-0-0)
think the specificity of the literary? The epistemology of literature;
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Philosophy
Fictionality, Possible Worlds;Through what concept of existence do
as decided by the instructor.
we distinguish literature from other phenomena, such as, hypotheses,
lies, counterfactuals, dreams? Literature and/as Moral Philosophy; Is
HUL861 psychology of Decision Making
there a law of literature or does literature constitute legality itself?
How does literature relate to non-literary, scientific, and everyday 3 Credits (3-0-0)
discourses? Life as Narrative and theories of narrative self; The The course will cover topics on psychological constructs affecting
relation between literature, aesthesis and reason; and emotional decision making (e.g., IQ, memory, motivation, emotion), decision-
response to Fiction. making processes (e.g., information search, risk perception), decision-
making contexts (e.g., constraints, culture), and applications of
HUL852 political philosophy behavioral decision making related to consumption (e.g., environment,
3 Credits (3-0-0) technology, consumer decision making).
This course will introduce students to key concepts and theories
HUL862 Special Module in Cognitive psychology
in political philosophy, such as justice, democracy, citizenship,
secularism, sovereignty, equality, rights, and freedom. The approach 3 Credits (2-0-2)
will sometimes be historical, involving an intense engagement with the The course will cover brief history of cognitive psychology, approaches,
work of a particular thinker or philosophical tradition; at other times is theoretical frameworks, and current issues in cognitive psychology.
will be thematic, taking up a particular notion such as secularism and
addressing it from many different points of view. The emphasis will be HUL863 Emotion and Cognition
on a close and rigorous reading of these texts, while also addressing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
questions about their contemporary relevance. The lecture outline is
The course will cover the following topics: theoretical approaches to
for ONE possible course on key texts in the Western liberal tradition.
emotion (evolutionary, biological, social, cognitive), select emotions
and emotion expression (e.g., anger, fear, sadness, joy, surprise,
HUL853 Art and Aesthetics
disgust), and implications of emotion and cognition (e.g., stress-
3 Credits (3-0-0) health, sex-differences)
• Aesthetic Attitude and Aesthetic Experience • The Ontology of Art:
on what kind of a thing is a work of art • Theories of Art: Resemblance, HUL870 Advanced Topics in psychology
Representation, Expression and Form • Aesthetic Judgement: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Perception and Imagination; The Sublime and the Beautiful •
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Policy Studies
Emotional Response to Fiction • Criticism and Interpretation: on
as decided by the instructor.
whethr critical-interpretative cannons are fixed or open-ended • Art,
Tradition and Modernity • Art, Morality and Politics: Art as Ideology
HUL871 Ethnographic perspectives on the State
• Metaphor, Narrative and Fictionality • Philosophy and Literature: on
Literature as Cognitive Thought-Experiment about Human Possibility 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Traditionally studied by political scientists, the state has increasingly
HUL854 problems in Metaphysics come to be regarded as an object of anthropological study.
Ethnographic perspectives on the state seek to open up the state to
3 Credits (3-0-0)
critical scrutiny, dislodging it as a monolithic conceptual or territorial
Ontological issues concerning God or Necessary Being, Mind, Self and
apparatus. These studies allow us to think of the state beyond
Personal Identity, Universals and Particulars, Primary and Secondary
governmentality or bureaucracy, to engaging with the multiple ways
Qualities, and Fictional Objects . Understanding the place of Mind
in which state ‘effects’ shape our engagement with it. How does the
in the Natural World, the distinction between Being-in-itself and
‘idea’ of the state constrain the way in which we ‘think’ the state?
Being-for-itself, Agency and Freedom, Subjective and Objective,
What are the ethnographic sites through which the state emerges
Consciousness and Self-Consciousness, and the notion of Inter-
as an object of study, e.g., bureaucracy, law, sexuality, marriage,
subjectivity. Special study on the conceptualization of reality in terms
citizenship, borders etc? The course will consist of seminars designed
of Phenomena and Noumena will form an important part of the course.
around a set of readings, which will be discussed in detail each week.
HUL856 philosophy of Language HUL872 Sexuality, Governmentality, and the State
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course is a study of four major topics: Reference and Descriptions; Sexual governance or state surveillance of issues pertaining to
Truth and Meaning; Pragmatics and Speech Acts; Language and sexuality, marriage and mobility highlight the problematic division
Metaphor. The course covers analyses of the following specific between the ‘public’ and the ‘private’. The ‘intimate’ sphere is no
concepts: Sense, Reference, Descriptions, Proper Names, Natural longer one that is outside the purview of states; indeed the ‘private’
Kind Terms, Truth, Intentional semantics, Communicative Utterances; or the ‘intimate’ is often co-produced as a corollary of the public
Figurative Speech. face of a state’s legitimacy. Nationalism and patriotism are heavily
grounded in issues pertaining to culture and sexuality, often thought
HUL857 Epistemology of as ‘private’. This course will provide a historical and sociological
3 Credits (3-0-0) perspective to how sexual governance – the control of women’s
sexuality, conjugality and the definition of ‘marriage’ and the ‘family’
Necessary and Sufficient conditions of Knowledge and the Gettier
by a patriarchal state shows that the state has always concerned
Problem. Theories of Epistemic Justification: Evidentialism and
itself with the intimate lives of its citizens.
Reliabilism; Internalism and Externalism; Foundationalism and
Coherentism. Scepticism: Philosophical Scepticism and Ordinary
HUL873 Language, Culture and Society
Incredulity; Semantic Contextualism and Inferential Contextualism.
Social Epistemology: Epistemology and Collective Doxastic Agency; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Epistemology of Testimony. Virtue Epistemology: Knowledge and What is language? How does it relate to the ‘collective consciousness’
Intellectual Virtues; Epistemic Values. Feminist Epistemology: Critique of a society? How does language relate to ideology and when does
233

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
language become ‘linguistic capital’? This course introduces students and conflict over resource distribution. These propel the debates on
to some theoretical approaches to the study of language in social ecological utopias. Case Studies include (any two per semester):
anthropology, such as structuralism and Marxism. This will be followed forestry; industry and mining; body and health; climate change;
by studies of language movements, language policy in colonial and water; political ecology of tribal areas of India.
postcolonial India. The course concludes with questions of ‘free
speech’, ‘hate speech’ and some debates on censorship. HUL880 Advanced Topics in Sociology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL874 Civil Society and Democracy in India
This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Sociology
3 Credits (3-0-0) as decided by the instructor.
This is a post-graduate level seminar based course. The objective
of this course is to discuss the complex and contingent relationships HUL881 Narratology: Foundations, Domains, Frontiers
between state, market and civil society in India and examine the
3 Credits (3-0-0)
implications of their relationships for the broader processes of
The course will familiarise students with the beginnings of this field
development, democratization, citizenship rights and governance
of study in Russian formalism, structural linguistics and anthropology,
in India. The course begins with an overview of the classical and
and then its entry into literary studies, discourse and stylistics. The
modern theories of the state and civil society. Students read Hobbes,
course will trace the development of narratological concepts (e.g.
Locke, Hegel, Marx, Gramsci, Tocqueville and other political theorists.
fabula/sujet, narrative voice, focalisation, paratext metalepsis,
The course will then focus on the role that civil society has played in
unreliability, free indirect speech, orientation, evaluation, coda
Indian development and democracy. The course will discuss topics
etc.) within schools of thought since the 1970s on. It will visit the
such as civil society and political society, NGO-ization, non-party
debates on narrativity and gender, race, history, ideology, culture
political processes, social capital and ethnic conflict, economic roots
and cognition. The spread of narrative theory beyond literary works
of civil society and participatory development and democratization.
to other areas such as comic books and video games, as well as its
relevance to other disciplinary inquires in sociology, legal studies,
HUL875 Ethnic Identity, Development and
political theory, postcolonial theory and psychology will be discussed.
Democratization in North-east India
The course will consider the philosophical questions of narrative and
3 Credits (3-0-0) temporality, anti-narrative, subjectivity, language, action, personhood,
Making of Northeast India (NEI) – past and present; Regional framing, closure and evolutionary theory.
identity and Nationalism; Look East policy and Vision 2020; Identity
politics, ethnic affirmation, territorial sovereignty and ethnic violence; HUL882 Cyberpower and Cyber-protest
underdevelopment and development challenges; social movements,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ethnic movements for political autonomy and secessionism; responses
Network Society and the Internet, Cyberspace and the Virtual
of Indian state and AFSPA; gender, tribalism, race, and religion; civil
Individual; ICT Outreach, Social Inclusion, and Digital Divide in
society in NEI; human development report.
Developing countries; Digital Democracy and the Online Public
Sphere; Cyberpower, and Cyberpolitics; Smart mobs; Cyberprotest;
HUL876 Ethnography: Theory, practice and Critique
Case Studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: HSV771 HUL883 History and Revolution
This course seeks to build awareness of what is ethnography – both 3 Credits (3-0-0)
as a research method and as a way of seeing/being/acting. It seeks The course will study major concepts of historicality and revolution in
to understand and theorize the nature of the relationship forged order to examine the role played by revolution in bringing or blocking
between the researcher and the field. The course will involve a close historical change, in breaking with certain social and intellectual
reading of ethnographic texts that deploy a range of techniques that patterns. It will respond to questions about the nature of the pre-
involves both classic as well as inter-disciplinary styles of ethnography revolutionary moment emergent within existing historical situations
such as sensory and auto-ethnography. and yet departing from them; the designation of selective historical
moments as revolutionary; the variety of domains beyond the narrowly
HUL877 Industry and Society defined domain of politics that have seen revolution, for instance, in
3 Credits (3-0-0) science, technology, social relations, and philosophy. With respect to
The course material will include the following topics: evolution of political revolutions, how is a revolution in history analysed, and what
industrial society, industry and industrialization, class and work happens to sovereignty? What is the role of violence in revolution as
in modern industrial societies, alienation and embourgeoisement, compared to other categories of history (period, epoch), and how does
labour management relations and labour reforms, family in it affect language itself, both of literary representations of revolution
industrial society, formal and informal sector, technology and new and of historiography?
economy, industry, industrial resources and new social movement,
post-industrial society. HUL884 Environmental Ethics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
HUL878 Globalization
Pre-requisite(s): HUL275
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course introduces different understandings about categories
Globalization and Globalism; Economic Globalization and Neo-
of ‘environment’ and ‘environmentalism’ that have emerged in
Liberalism; Political Globalization; Social and Cultural Globalization;
contemporary thought, and its implications to its study in within an
Civil Society and International Politics; Anti-Globalization.
ethics framework. It seeks to explore three tropes. First, is a foray into
the nature-culture debate, a debate central to environmental ethics. It
HUL879 political Ecology as a Development Critique
seeks to lay the basis for the field by tracing key texts in the debate,
3 Credits (3-0-0) viz., how the category of ‘nature’ is understood to be something
Questions of conflict over natural resources, the conservation of which is external to humans. Second, we seek to understand the
biodiversity under market environmentalism, the political ecology of ways in which the ‘crisis’ in environment is constructed, a crisis
farming and industry, the emergence of environmental movements, which then would require certain ethical approaches to amelioration
the political ecology of indigenous people, feminist political ecology, of our relationship with our surroundings. Third, is an exploration of
urban ecology, environmental justice, and degrowth comprise core specific themes in the field of contemporary environmental ethics -
concerns of this course. The influence of globalization and neo- critical environmental aesthetics, applied ethics in agriculture, and
liberalism provides a rich context to understand these contestations explore ethical frameworks from non Western realms like in the Indic
234

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Humanities and Social Sciences
context, and Buddhist environmental ethics. This course looks at the HUp102 Research participation
imperatives and politics that shaped the literatures and discourses 1 Credit (0-0-1)
that shaped environmental ethics as a distinct discipline.
This course will expose students to various experimental methodologies
in sub-fields of Psychology and Psycho/Cognitive-linguistics. These will
HUL885 Criticism, Crisis and Critique
be behavioral experiments that will investigate theoretical questions
3 Credits (3-0-0) (e.g., psychological questions related to perception, attention,
In this course we will inquire into some or all of the following questions emotion, choice behavior; psycho-linguistic questions related to
pertaining to the relation between criticism, crisis, critique and critical sentence comprehension, sentence production, memory, attention,
theory: a) the development of criticism as a part of the literary as language-perception interaction). The course will illustrate ways
well as philosophical inquiries into morals and tastes from antiquity in which theoretical/practical research query pertaining to human
to the present; b) the manner in which the development of the idea cognition is translated into a testable problem with the help of widely
of critique in the context of the crisis that accompanied 18th century used behavioral methods.
“Enlightenment”, the rise of the public sphere, and colonialism; c)
the relation of criticism and critique to literature and to metaphysical HUV731 Critical Reading
inquiry; d) the concepts and concerns that inform theoretical and 1 Credit (1-0-0)
critical activity today, i.e., the critiques of gender, religion, race The course will introduce students to the tools of critical analysis of a
and caste; e) the relation of critical theory to critical practice, e.g. variety of verbal texts – poetry, short stories, essays, non-fiction and
application, evaluation, description, self-reflexivity, and resistance, as academic writing. It will require students to study basic semiotics, and
observed in various schools of literary theory and criticism. critical terms and study a variety of texts prescribed for the course.
HUL886 American Fiction-II HUV734 Dimensions of Language
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
This is a survey course covering American fiction of the post- World The course will provide a brief overview of the important contributions
War–I period. Some of the major novelists of the period will be to the study of language, its origins, diversity, and its metaphysical,
studied, including Hemingway, Scott Fitzgerald, Steinbeck, Richard historical and political dimensions in order to attend to the multiple
Wright, Ralph Ellison, Saul Bellow, Bernard Malamud, John Barth, levels at which literature plays with and transforms language on the
John Updike. one hand, and is conditioned by on the other. A range of readings
will be used to focus on: the relation between language use and a
HUL888 Applied Linguistics particular historical and social situation, and the work of literature in
3 Credits (3-0-0) defining this relation; the politics of language with respect to state,
religion, nation, gender and caste; subjectivity in language; metaphor
Notions of applied linguistics; psycholinguistics; socio-linguistics;
and metonymy, literary stylistics and rhetoric; agrammaticality.
language learning; language teaching; contrastive analysis; error
analysis; pedagogic grammars; applied lexicology; communicative
HUV735 Narrative Matters
teaching; discourse analysis; stylistic and literature.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
HUL889 British Fiction – A Stylistics Approach The course will acquaint students with the distinctions of formal
and conversational, fictional and non-fictional narratives. Students
3 Credits (3-0-0)
will acquire the training to think about and conduct research on
Language in prose and poetry; stylistics; deviance; prominence,
discourse by going beyond the story and plot and considering
foregrounding; literary relevance; stylistic variants; language and the
discourses in terms of salient narrative features such as narration,
fictional world; the rhetoric of text; discourse situation; conversation,
author, reception, motivation, tradition, and framing. The politics
speech and thought.
of culture, representation and the working of power can be better
analysed with a mind to the role of narrative in action, communication
HUL891 Globalization and Transnationalism and signification.
3 Credits (2-1-0)
Globalization & Globalism, Nationalism & Transnationalism, Dicopora, HUV747 Data-driven Analysis and Tools for Linguistic
Glocality. Globalisation and Transnational movements of people, Research
ideas & technology, culture, capital and goods. Relationship between 2 Credits (2-0-0)
locality, national boundaries and transnationalism personal and
Pre-requisite(s): HUL 242 for UG
collective identity. Transnational migration and global politics of
gender and work in a global world- Dicopora. Religion and Ethnicity The course will cover the following topics: (1) Quick introduction to
in a global world. The State and Democracy in a globalised world. Python (2) It will give a broad overview of how one can use natural
language text for making linguistic generalization and discovering
linguistics patterns, (3) We will also look at how the data can be
HUL893 Literature and the City
used to make automatic tools such as taggers and parsers. In the
The course examines in some detail the nature of the challenge process we will learn to use the following resources/tools: (a) NLTK
that traditionally preoccupied European writers - how to map the (b) MaltParser (c) WordNet.
experience of the modern city, and what representational strategies
were adequate for capturing the opacity, the fragmentation, and the HUV748 Data Analysis for psycholinguistics using R
transitory nature of urban modernity. It goes on to investigate the
2 Credits (2-0-0)
contemporary postcolonial city in order to understand it in relation
to late capitalism, globalization, migration, and postmodern culture, Pre-requisite(s): HUL 242 and HUL 381 for UG
and the challenges these pose to classic modernity. It begins by The course will comprise of 4 broad themes. In the 1st part of the
providing an introduction to some of the most important literature course we will introduce the basics of R. R syntax and its libraries will
on the city and the major theoretical debates around it, offering be extensively used for other parts of the course. In the 2nd part we
students a set of conceptual tools with which to approach the city’s will introduce basics of statistics that are needed for understanding
incommensurable realities, its problems and its potential. It moves ideas of frequentist-based hypothesis testing methods. We will then
on to a detailed analysis of a number of literary texts, examining move on to linear regression which will form the background using
some of the ways in which the disjunctive realities of city-life shape which we introduce linear-mixed models in the final section of the
new modes of experience, creative expression, and solidarity, without course. The course will also provide assignments and projects where
losing sight of the inequities of gender, culture, class, and race that the students can practice the course content and apply the learnt
persist and indeed strengthen in the current global economic system. concepts to real experimental data.
235

Humanities and Social Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
HUV773 Tools for Sociological Research HUV781 Introduction to Research Methods
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
In this course, the students will be introduced to mixed methods This course will begin with introducing students to different paradigms
research (quantitative and qualitative). They will be familiarized of inquiry and research with implications for methodology. It will then
with specific modes of observation such as surveys, focus group provide an overview of how to formulate research questions and
discussions, interviews, and participatory rural appraisal, followed hypotheses, identify unit of analysis, conceptualize and operationalize
by designing specific tools of data collection such as questionnaires variables of interest. The students will be familiarized with random
and interview protocols for different modes of observation. Special and non-random methods of sampling. The discourse on research
emphasis will be given to household surveys and data from large ethics will be an integral part of most discussions in this course.
surveys such as census, NFHS, NSS, migration and urban surveys.
This will be followed by elementary data analysis techniques and HUV886 Special Module in Cognitive psychology
inferential statistics, converting qualitative data into quantitative data
2 Credits (1-0-2)
and the use of qualitative data analysis software.
The course will focus on current relevant and emerging issues, and
HUV774 Methods in Historical Sociology experiments in the field of cognitive psychology.
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
HUV887 Special Module on Econometric Tools
As sociologists increasingly turn to the past for an understanding of
1 Credit (1-0-0)
the present, the discipline has incorporated methods from historical
research. These include debates on what constitutes an archive, Pre-requisite(s): HUL or SML 700/800 category courses
the production of the past as an exercise of power, and how to Estimation and inference in two variable model; OLS assumption;
read historical sources in an ethnographic vein. The significance of Extension of the two variable model; OLS assumption : autocorrelation,
the ‘fragment’ or documentary evidence for ethnographic research multicollinearity, and heteroskedasticity, models with limited
will be considered. This module will introduce students to some of dependent variables : LPM, logit, and probit; Panel data modelling:
these larger methodological and theoretical debates from history fixed effect and random effect models; Time series analysis:
and sociology. introduction to non-stationarity, AR and MA modelling.
236

Department of Management Studies
MSL301 Organization & people Management of the consumer, Pain points of potential consumer. Pricing,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Product features, Service quality, Delivery, Consumer need analysis,
Consumer’s environment (Physical and social), Cultural influences,
Lectures on multidisciplinary perspective on organizations,
Family influence, Family decision making, Demographic changes in
Organizational structure & Design, Organizational stakeholder Ethics,
family, Consumer socialisation.
Organizational Culture, Organizational Environment, Strategy and
Structure, Technology and organizational structures, Lifecycle of an Module III: Ideation Process, Creative thinking, Individual vs.
organization will be supported with case studies & exercises. group creativity, Tools and techniques for creativity, Creativity
Management, Evaluation of creativity methods, Fostering a creative
MSL302 Managerial Accounting & Financial Management working environment, Organizing to allow and assist creativity,
Creativity and idea generation. Challenging assumptions, Ideation as
3 Credits (3-0-0)
personal journey and purpose-oriented way of life, Leading change,
On completion of this course the student will be able to: Understand
Idea in the context of environmental dynamics, Idea to lead change,
accounting for managerial decisions. Assess financial health of a
Ideation Framework, Ideation as process and a way of life, Tools for
corporate firm. Design profit planning. Understand cost concepts and
Ideation, Context for idea generation, Approach to generation of
financial decision making.
ideas, Techniques to generate ideas, ideation process, idea repository.
MSL303 Marketing Management Module IV: Prototyping, Cycle time of development, Product
Development Process, Identifying Customer Needs, Product Planning,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Product Specifications and Concept Generation, Prototyping, Concept
Marketing concept, Environment of Marketing, Marketing Strategy, Selection and testing, Peer Concept Review, Product Architecture,
Marketing Ethics, Marketing Planning, Concept of Product life cycle, Industrial Design, Design for Environment, Design for Manufacturing,
Pricing, Advertising and Promotion Strategies, Concept of Unique Time to manufacture, Early Demand Forecasting for New Products,
selling proposition, Product and Brand Management, Marketing Product development economics.
Research Methodologies, Case study discussions.
MSL307 Venture Financing & Teaming
MSL304 Managing Operations
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL305, MSL306
The objective of the course is to provide the students about the
application of Industrial management in various functional areas of Module I: Early Stage venture financial sourcing and utilization, Art of
business especially industrial operations such as linear programing, Bootstrapping: Emphasize the significance, switch to external funding.
assignment and transportation problem, layout/location design, Module II: Process, options and strategy of acquiring resources
quality, materials management, Preventive maintenance, project Module III: Attracting Investment at early stage: Dwell on idea
management, supply chain management, scheduling/sequencing, communication, trust building and sourcing of early investors into
ergonomics, operations strategy. The entire course is a case based the venture along with comparative evaluation of early investment
where the participants will be given a case. Participants will be opportunities.
asked to tackle the case problem without using linear programming
Module IV: Early Stage Valuation Models, tools of financial valuation.
techniques.
The role of valuation in investment decisions faced by entrepreneurs
and investors.
MSL305 New Venture Creation
Module V: Art and science of utilizing and managing resources.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Module VI: Team Synergy and Engagement Terms: Challenges,
New Venture Definition, Venture challenges and preparedness, History
long-term payoffs of high-performance synergized teaming. an early
of Enterprise, Modern Firm as an Enterprise, New Enterprise and
stage venture. Real-world case studies on entrepreneurial finance.
Technology Development, Technology Enabled Venture, Innovation
and Problem-ambiguity, Innovation and Risk-taking, Self-discovery,
MSD308 product Viability & Market Traction
Aspiration Mapping, Founder Leadership, Values for Implementing
Vision, Entrepreneurial competency awareness, Entrepreneurial 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Mindset, Entrepreneurial Strategic Orientation, Commitment to Pre-requisite(s): MSL305, MSL306, MSL307
Opportu- nity, Commitment to Resources, Early Stage Resource
Business Model concept, Emerging Business Models, Lean Business
Control, Management Structure for Entrepreneurial Culture,
Modelling, Business Model Innovation & Design, Value Proposition,
Entrepreneurial Mindset on Compensation/Reward Policy, Artic-
Market Analysis, Market Sensing, Understanding consumer perception
ulating Entrepreneurial Strategies, Ideation & venture development,
and behaviour, Knowing market dynamics, Competitive Advantage,
Intrapreneurship vs Entrepreneurship, Internal Venturing.
Willingness to Pay.
Opportunity Sensing, Sustainable & Empathetic Entrepreneurial
Qualitative & Secondary Market Research methods for startups,
Design, Entrepreneurial Resourcefulness, Early Stage Organisation
Target segment identification, Demand analysis and forecasting,
Building, Venture Evangelising, Marketing and Business Development.
Market Strategy and Marketing Plan, Go-To-Market process, Building
Marketing & Sales teams, Business Development, Brand building and
MSL306 Ideation & prototyping
Brand Communication, Minimum Viable Product (MVP).
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module I: Framework for changing environment, Criteria and
MSD309 Business plan & Funding
perimeter definition for relevance, Idea potential Recognition,
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Incorporating environmental factors into idea development, Venture
life cycle of ideation, planning, implementation, Understanding socio- Pre-requisite(s): MSL305, MSL306, MSL307, MSD308
cultural, politico-legal & economic dimensions of the environment, Business Planning & Assumptions, Growth Projection, Realistic Cost
opportunities and challenges, Macroeconomic indicators relevant estimation, Revisiting/Critiquing 'State of the Venture’, Cost monitoring
to an idea, Demand estimation for emerging market, Policy regime and Management techniques, Products/services pricing techniques,
changes and opportunities, Global Economic Environment impact on Revenue projections, Financial Analysis and ratios, Effective
Indian markets, Changing Social Paradigms & Evolving Technology. communication for funding, Business Presentation Components
Module II: Understanding consumer behaviour as a prerequisite Venture Pitching, Organising venture Information for presentation
for marketing plan and strategy, Consumer discovery: Consumer Fund Sourcing Strategy, Fund Usage, Optimal usage of investment
location, Market analytics, Psychographic and demographic profile, funds, Planning & Preparing for Scaling Venture Scaling. Fund Usage,
Income levels, geography and culture); Product knowledge and Scaling issues, Budget preparation, Detailed planning for business
involvement; Reasons for the purchase; Decision making process operations, Business monitoring and performance metrics.
237

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
MSL310 Financial Institutions and Markets Positioning and Differentiation, Brand Positioning Statement, Engaging
3 Credits (3-0-0) Brand Professionals, Creating Brand Portfolio, Choosing Brand
Elements, Branding Activities & Execution Plan Design, Assessing
Introduction to the financial markets including debt, equity, derivative,
Brand Readiness, Communication System Design for Repeat Business
and foreign exchange markets, various types of securities issued and
and Scaling, Correlation with Branding, Communicating Value
traded in these markets, why these securities are issued, what are
Proposition,, Stakeholder and Potential Customer Feedback, PR
the risks associated with these securities, and how these risks are
Engagement, Advertising Budget for Startups, Advertising Campaign
managed. This course also covers roles played by different financial
Design, Communication Channel Selection, Social Media & Digital
institutions in an economy and regulatory framework surrounding
Marketing Managing Personal Communications.
financial markets.
Distribution Channel Decisions, Sales Planning & Execution & Installing
MSL311 Emerging Trends in Finance Processes, Systems for Sales Productivity, Sales Force Recruitment
and Training, Sales Script Design for Direct Marketing, Cold Calling,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Closing Sales Deal, Managing Sales Process.
Classical understanding of rationality and utility of finance and
Post Customer Acquisition, Handing New businesses to Internal
emerging critiques; tools used to assess the financial health of firms,
Processes, New Opportunities from Known Accounts, Consumer
including financial statement, ratio analysis etc.; security analysis
Grievances, Win/Loss Review, Process Modification for Value
encompassing risk, return, valuation models; vanilla derivatives
Proposition, Innovation/Continuous improvement of installed GTM Flow.
securities- forwards, futures and options; critique of the rationality
assumption; behavioural finance aspects; financial technology - MSL404 Entrepreneurial Business Development
blockchain, mining, hashing, encryption, validation, and bitcoin;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
regulatory sandbox, way forward.
Building and Managing Core Business Relationships, Managing Core
MSL401 Entrepreneurial Design Thinking Relationship, Internal and External Stakeholders of B2B, B2C, and
B2B2C Setup, BD for Predictable Business Cycles.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Creating Business Development Process, Business Development
Designing to Needs, Problem Framing and Problem Finding,
Stakeholder Incentive, Building Continuous Improvement Processes,
Techniques of Brainstorming and Idea Generation, Innovative
Stakeholder Identification and Development Framework, Six Degrees
Problem Solving, Design Thinking process, Mind mapping, Nominal
of Separation, Art of Networking, Internalizing Intangible Aspects of
Group Techniques, Reversal Techniques, Rotating Attention, Lateral
Relationships, Systemic Culture, Adapting to Stakeholders’ Cultures,
Thinking, Forced Relationships, Use of Analogies, Attribute Analysis,
Importance of Values, Strategies around Legal, Moral, Geo-Political
Visual thinking, Entrepreneurial Design Thinking, Human Centred
Issues, Understanding and Optimal Usage of Methodologies.
Design, Impacting Lives to Promote Innovation.
Role of Technology in Building and Managing Core Relationships. Tech-
Understanding of Materials, Forms Shaping, Processes of Prototyping, enabled Systems for Building and Managing Core Relationships (CRM),
Experimenting and Iterating, Process of Creating New Options, Productivity Tools to Manage Core Relations. ERP Tools for Startups and
Design and Society, Global Impact of Design, Design Thinking for Mid-Size Companies, Social Media Usage to Move Strategic Agenda,
Global Impact, Balancing Process of Design, Ethical Implications of Consistency in Personal Integrity, Principles, Morals and Obligations,
Design, Leading the Founding Team, Values for Implementing Vision, Art of De-learning, Relearning and Applying New Skills, Harvesting
Forming Design Team, Design Based Customer Needs Identification, Assets in Perpetuity, Framing Existing Relationships and Linkages.
Understanding Product Architecture, Financial Analysis, Designing for
Environment and Sustainability. MSL405 Financial Accounting & Compliance for Startups
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL402 Social Innovation & Entrepreneurship
Expense Accounting, Levels of Profit Depreciation, Interest Accounting,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Taxes, Appropriations, Understanding Financial Statements – Balance
Social Entrepreneur Definition, Social Entrepreneurship Preparedness Sheet, Accounting for Fixed Assets, Current Assets (Inventory),
and Capabilities, Social Problem Sources, Social Opportunity Liabilities accounting, Working Capital, Understanding Financial
Identification, Changing Social Problems/Liabilities into Enterprise Statements – Cash Flows, CF for Financial Health, Financial Statement
Opportunities, Societal Value Creation Process, Measuring Social Analysis, Linkage between IS, BS and CF, Horizontal and Vertical
Impact Social Venture Concept, Establishing a Viable and Growing Analysis, Comparison with peer group and industry, Tax related
Enterprise, Legal Framework for Social Enterprise Formation, Social compliances, GST for Startups, Income Tax for Startups, Sensitization
Asset Building, Income Generation for a Social Enterprise, Financial of Limitations of Accounting Statements, New Venture Working Capital
Structures for Social Ventures, Income Models and Revenue Strategy Management, Sources and Drivers of Firm Value, Negotiation with
for Social Venture, Transferring Financial Models to New Social Angels/VC, Structuring the deal with Angels/VC, Tools & Models of
Context, Team Building & Alignment. Financial Valuation, Role of Valuation in Investment, Financial Models
Social Business Model Canvas for Planning Social Venture, Social and Analysis, Opportunity Cost of Capital, Entrepreneurial Finance,
Innovation Planning, Business Model Design for Social Enterprise, Sources of finance for Startups, Security Design and contracting
Scaling Social Venture Impact. Business Plan for Social Mission, Venture capital Cycle, Monitoring and Advising Corporate Venturing,
Emerging Organisational Forms for Social Enterprise, Funding International Perspectives on Venture Capital Finance. Real-world
Strategy for Social Venture, Social Impact Investment, Pitching for Case Studies.
Social Funding/Grants, Communication Strategy of Social Enterprises,
MSL406 Company Law, Governance, IpR & Legal Issues
Marketing to Social Beneficiaries.
for Startups
Growth of Social Enterprises, Replicating Social Innovation, International
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Growth Strategies to Scale/Replicate Business Model, Organic
Growth, Social Fanchising, Open Source Approach, Exit Strategies Navigate Relevant Legal System. Legal Aspects of Forming &
for Social Ventures, Extracting Value from Failed Social Ventures. Structuring Companies, Incorporation Strategies), Forms of
Incorporation, Sole proprietorship. Partnership, Limited Liability
MSL403 Entrepreneurial Market Strategies Company, Private limited company, Social Enterprise Incorporation,
Registration and due diligence, Tax implications of Enterprise Form,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Founders’ Equity arrangements, Contract Act, Startup Employment
Process & Discipline of Market Sensing, Value Proposition for
Issues - Non-disclosure Agreement, Direct Taxes on Startup
Relevant Stakeholders, Go to Market (GTM), Developing Profitable
Compensation Structure, Tax Efficient Compensation Structure, Sweat
Core Product Design.
Equity/ESOPs, Intellectual Property Tights (IPR), Time & Process
Branding Essentials, Target Market Identification. Market Communi- of Patenting, Idea Disclosure, Legal protection for IPR violation,
cations Objectives, Creating Brands, Scope of Branding, Brand Consumer protection, Indirect Taxes and Impact on Business, Service
238

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
tax Compliance and Impact, Legal issues (Incorporation, IPO, Due Staying Inspired. Continuous Learning, Initiating New Work Culture,
diligence Stock Exchange Listing, Privacy Policy and Terms of Use, Blending Formal and Informal Work Environments, Motivation
Legal Aspects of Investment, Frequent Legal Oversight & Mistakes, and Fairness in Startup Environment, Aligning and Motivating
Oral Contract Enforceability, Insolvency & Bankruptcy, Managing Legal Valued Employees for Personal Fulfilment. Anticipating & Planning
Claims by a Low Performing Startup. for Entrepreneurial Risk, Preparing Startup Team for Exigencies,
Managing Personal Impact from Startup Failures, Communicating
MSL407 Corporate Innovation & Entrepreneurship
Startup Failures, Extracting Learnings from Startup Failures, Life of
3 Credits (3-0-0) Serial Entrepreneurs, Life of Successful Entrepreneurs, Life Quality
Intrapreneurship Concept, Intrapreneurship & Entrepreneurship Issues for Entrepreneurs.
Distinction, Corporate Experiences in Intrapreneurship, Intrapreneurial
MSL700 Fundamentals of Management of Technology
initiatives in Matured Organizations, Sensing Emerging Corporate
Opportunities, Corporate Learning from Intrapreneurial Initiatives 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Failures, Intrapreneurial Strategies, Cross-Functional Teams Module I: Understanding technology: definition, Key concepts, role,
for Intrapreneurship, Corporate Innovation, Innovation and importance, need. History of technological developments, Today’s
Intrapreneurship, Growth stagnation in Successful Firms, Sources of challenges. Issues of concern in Management of New Technology.
Organisational Rigidity , Organisational Fatigue in Market Response, Technology-Management integration, Life cycle approach to
Rekindling ‘innovation , New Business Creation, Measuring/ technology management. Technology innovation process. Managing
Tracking Intrapreneurship, Channeling organisational resources for and fostering the Innovation.
intrapreneurship, Intrapreneurial Environment to Sustain Initiatives, Module II: Technology forecasting and assessment. Technology
Processes for Overcoming Organizational Inertia. flow and diffusion. Evaluating technology, technology planning and
Implementing Intrapreneurial Changes, Challenges Implementing strategy, Strategic potential of new technology. Factors promoting
Initiatives, Resolving Implementation Challenges, Intrapreneurial technology acquisition. Flexibility in Technology Management.
Leadership, Intrapreneurial Talent Recruitment, Lateral Entrepreneurial Technology transfer and absorption, Modes of global technology
Potential, Entrepreneurial Team Building Stratetegies, Cross- transfer. Technological Entrepreneurship.
Functional Team Effectiveness, Methodologies for Group Dynamics, Module III: Technology implementation. Integrating people and
Decision Making, Power, and Conflict in Intrapreneurial Teams. technology, human factors in technology operations. Organisation
Innovative Networks Idea Sourcing, Key Individuals and Organisations structure and technology. Investing for technological maintenance
in External Environment, Internal Venturing, In-house Incubation, and growth. Concern of phasing out and upgradation. Market
Corporate Incubation in Entrepreneurial Ecosystem, Framework for factors in technology operations, Science and Technology Policy,
Culture of Intrapreneurship. Technology support systems. Information networking for technological
updatedness.
MSL408 Startup performance Management
3 Credits (3-0-0) MSL701 Strategic Technology Management
Management Processes for Startups, Defining & Setting Strategic 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Intent for Startups, Dynamic Timelines and Benchmarks, Measuring Module I: Emerging technology-strategy relationship in the large
Financial and Non-financial Startup Performance, Qualitative corporation from the perspective of individual firm, and entire industry.
and Quantitative Performance Metrics, Continuous Performance Global technology comparison, technological change, sources of
Feedback System. technology, Technology Information. Criticality of technology for
Entrepreneurial Leadership, Leadership Issues in Entrepreneurial growth, core competencies, R&D productivity, Resource Leverage.
Setup. Functions as Entrepreneurial Leader, Transformational World Class Organisation.
Enactment, Mental Models and Behaviour as Leader, Uncertainty Module II: Corporate technology strategy, Generic competitive
Sense-making, Perceptual Barriers and Stereotypes, Integrative technology strategies. Corporate R&D, Strategic technology
Actions, Motivation Building, Learning Ability of Founders, Acquire, management process, relationship between technology strategy
Develop and Retain Entrepreneurial Talent, Environment for and corporate strategy. Strategic shifts and resource commitments,
Entrepreneurial Transformation, Supporting key Stakeholders, Flexible technology vision and goals, technology leadership. SWOT analysis
Resource Deployment, Dynamic Capabilities for Startups, Leadership for technology, Matching Business Portfolio and Technology Portfolio,
with Growth, Succession Management. Technology- Market matrix. Innovation and entry strategy, Flexibility
Strategic Management of Startups, Intent to Create Value, in Technology strategy.
Process of Strategy Evolution, Balancing Emerging Stakeholder Module III: Business/technology alliances and networks. Technology
Expectations, Positioning for Potential Competition, New Venture forecasting and assessment. Technology strategy at business level.
Dynamic Capabilities, Strategic Implementation of Venture Business Strategic Technology Planning, Investment in Technology, Technology
Model, Building New Capabilities from Success and Failure Cycle, Strategy and functional strategy. Implementation and Control of
Auditing Assets, Process, Capabilities and Competences, Dynamically technology strategy, Managing Corporate culture, structure, and
Management of Key Information, Strategic Management and Control interdepartmental linkages.
of Scarce Finance, Managing and Unifying Motivation, Sustainable
MSL702 Management of Innovation and R&D
Leadership Qualities for Entrepreneurs.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL409 Entrepreneurship and Life Balance
Module I: Technological innovation systems and processes.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Understanding the process of technological innovation and the
Execution of Smart Life Plan, Internal Origins of Novel Ideas, Value factors affecting successful innovation. Management problems from
Creation and Life View, Cost-benefit of an Entrepreneurial Aspiration, the product/service concept-stage to end-product/service marketing.
Aspiration Level on Time Scale, Family Ecosystem, Entrepreneurial Creativity and Innovation- Creativity process, Individual and group
Aspiration Acceptance by Family and Society, Appropriate and Effective creativity, Critical functions in the innovation process, Evolving
Communication in Relationships, Art of Sharing Entrepreneurial Ideas innovative culture, teams for innovation.
with Family and Friends, Family Participation in Startup Decisions. Module II: Product and technology life cycle, Management of R&D
Work-life Balance for Entrepreneurs, Work-Life Symbiosis, Work-Life planning, organising, staffing, scheduling, Controlling, budgeting,
Balance as Contributor to Venture Success & Sustainability, Time Selection of R&D projects. Methodologies for evaluating the
Management, Setting Work Boundaries, Role of Determination, effectiveness of R&D, Research Productivity. Protection of Intellectual
Aspiration and Time as a Resource, Scheduling & Prioritising Life, Property Rights. Evolving flexible organisation.
Wisdom Managing Personal Responsibilities, Planning and Flexibility Module III: Issues relating to managing scientists and technologists
Entrepreneurial time, Planning Open Time, Personal/Spiritual as individual, in teams, and in large organisations. Human
Development. Resource Management in R&D and Innovation, training, motivation,
239

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
communication, group dynamics. Information management for of sale, Distinction between sale and agreement to sell, sale and
innovation and R&D- strategies, sources, channels, and flows. hire purchase, sale distinguished from contract for work and labour.
Standardisation and Quality management. Kinds of goods, perishable goods. Document to the title of goods.
Rules regarding transfer of property, Transfer of Title on sale. Rules
MSL703 Management of Technology Transfer and regarding delivery of goods. Buyers rights against seller, and unpaid
Absorption seller’s right. Consumer protection act. Consumers rights, consumer’s
3 Credits (3-0-0) disputes redressel agencies, consumer protection council.
Module I: Transfer of technology from R&D to field and at Module III: Negotiable Instrumented act. Definition and
international level. Commercialization of new technology and new characteristic of Negotiable instrument. Liabilities of Parties to
venture management, prototyping, test marketing, pilot plant, project Negotiable Instruments. Brief exposure to Company law including
viability, Technology push and market full. Quality management, incorporation of a company - objects, registration, article of
customer education and awareness. Assessment, justification association, raising capital from public, company management and
and financing of new technology, source of funds, venture capital reconstruction, amalgamation and winding up.
financing. New venture products and services.
MSL707 Management Accounting
Module II: Global transfer of technology, Technology transfer
models: Active, passive. Multi channel approach: from hardware 3 Credits (3-0-0)
technical services acquisitions to strategic partnering and networking On completion of this course the student will be able to: Understand
arrangements. Sourcing technology, technology negotiation, licensing accounting principles governing preparation of financial statements.
agreement. Fee for technology transfer, royalty, equity participation. Assess financial health of a corporate firm. Design profit planning.
Modes: technological collaboration, joint venture, alliance, acquisition. Understand cost control systems. Understand techniques of pricing,
International S&T cooperation: institutional framework, multilateral/ product and capital budgeting decisions.
bilateral cooperation, pre-emptive R&D cooperation.
Module III: Absorbent Strategy: Japanese technology absorption, MSL708 Financial Management
Technology Absorption: product and process technologies, Reverse 3 Credits (3-0-0)
engineering. Appropriate technology. Vendor development. Adaptation
The course is comprehensive and is designed to equip the students
and assimilation of technology.
with tools and techniques to enable them to make sound financial
decisions, among others, related to capital budgeting, working capital,
MSL704 Science & Technology policy Systems
capital structure and dividend policy.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module I: Role of S&T in economic development, Modern analysis MSL709 Business Research Methods
of growth and structural change, international economic relations, 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
liberalisation, globalisation/ regionalisation, industrial/technological
partnerships, S&T in Indian Economic Policy. Government policy Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
and its impacts on technology development. Living with the new Introduction to Business Research Methods; Theoretical approaches;
technology, social issues. International trends, Technology policy Problem definition; Research Design; Questionnaires & Scales;
in USA, Japan, European Commission, and other select countries. Sampling - Probability, size and challenges; Survey & Observation,
Module II: National technology Policies, Regulatory Policies: Experiments; Qualitative Research, Secondary Data; Data Preparation
Industries Development and Regulation Act, MRTP, FERA, Intellectual & Analysis, Report Writing.
Property Rights, Patents act, Environment Protection Act, R&D Cess
MSL710 Creative problem Solving
Rules, Import Export Policy; Development Policies: Industrial Policy
Resolution, Scientific Policy Resolution, Technology Policy Statement, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
New Technology Policy, Policy on Foreign Investments and Technology Module I: Structure of managerial problems. Open and close
Imports. Role of UN and other International Agencies. ended problems, convergent and divergent thinking. The creativity
Module III: Support Systems: Technology infrastructure, process, Individual and group creativity, Idea generation methods:
technology parks, Technology development and utilization schemes Brain storming, Nominal Group Technique, Idea Engineering, Check
by government and Financial Institutions, Venture capital financing, list, Attribute listing, Morphological analysis, Synectics, Mental
TIFAC, Technology mission, Standards, Support to Small scale sectors. Imaging, Critical Questioning. Total System Intervention, Flexible
Research laboratories, and institutions. S&T in five year plans, Fiscal Systems Methodology.
incentives. Organization set up for Science and Technology. R&D in Module II: Idea Structuring: Graphic tools, Programme Planning
corporate sector. Linkages, Interpretive Structural Modelling, Relationship Analysis,
Flexible Systems Management, SAP-LAP Analysis, Flexibility Influence
MSL705 HRM Systems
Diagrams, Collaboration Diagrams. Scenario Building: Harva method,
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) Structural Analysis, Options Field/Profile Methodology.
This course focuses on various functions of human resource Module III: Viable Systems Modelling. Fuzzy sets in multicriteria
management. The course begins with the context and evolution of decision making, Analytic Hierarchy Process, Intelligent Management
HR, followed by functions of HR via cases and various exercises. Systems, Creativity applications in TQM and Business Process
Manpower planning, job design, recruitment & selection, training & Reengineering.
development, performance appraisal & management, compensation
& reward management and career management, legal issues in HRM MSL711 Strategic Management
are the topics covered. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Understanding new perspectives on strategic management ,
MSL706 Business Laws
Content and process of strategic management, Formulation and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
implementation of strategies, Developing cross-functional trade-off
Module I: Nature of Business law, Source of Business law and their decision making skills, and Help appreciate new themes in strategic
classification. Mercantile law, statue I Case law, Customs and Usage. management. This course will require reading books, articles, case
Agreement and their legal obligations. Essential elements of a valid studies and literature from the field of Strategic Management.
contract, types of contact, Void and voidable contract. Unenforceable The sessions would be interactive where attempt will be made to
and illegal agreements. Offer and acceptance over the telephone. Law of understand the theories and concepts through discussion of the
Arbitration –Definition of Arbitration, Effect of an arbitration. Arbitration readings and their application in cases. Student will be required to
without Intervention of Court. Powers and duties of Arbitrators. prepare and effectively participate in class and make impromptu or
Module II: Sale of Goods Act. Definition and essentials of a contract scheduled presentations of issues and learnings. Besides the readings,
240

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
groups of students will have to work on a comprehensive research Systems, Management Control Systems, Financial Information
project to investigate and validate some of the key learnings. Systems, Marketing Management Systems, Logistics and Distribution
Systems, Systems for Human Resources Planning and Performance
MSL712 Ethics & Values Based Leadership Management. System Dynamics Modelling.
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) Module III : Methodologies for Development and Improvement.
Methodology for developing Management System. Optimization
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
and Learning Systems methodologies, Microworld, Continuous
Ethics & Business, Ethical principles in business, Business and Its
Improvement and Reengineering of Management Systems. Organizing
External Exchanges: Ecology & Consumers, Business & Its Internal
to improve systems.
Constituencies.
MSL717 Business Systems Analysis & Design
MSL713 Information Systems Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
This course will have the following topics: System Analysis
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: Fundamentals: Introducing SA&D for Systems Professionals, Analyzing
Information Systems and its impact in Organization and People, the Business Case and Managing Systems Projects, Overview to Data
Information Technologies: concepts, types and usage, Information Structure in Systems Modeling, Data Flow Diagrams and Modelling
Systems, Organizations and Strategy, Economics of Information DFDs, Requirements Modelling and Systems Specification, User Driven
Systems, Foundations of E-Business, Foundations of Data Business Analysis, Role of the consultant, Object Oriented Modelling:
management, Foundations of Business Analytics, Networks and Object Relationships, Hierarchies, Use Case Approaches to identify
Collaboration as Business Solutions, Information Security & Risk and model classes, Process Driven Approaches: Gane, Sarson and
Management, Building and Managing Systems, Enterprise Systems, Yourdon techniques, Data Driven Approaches: Entity Relationship
etc. Hands on training would also be provided, using specific tools. Diagrams, Designing the User Interface and Output, Verification &
Validation of new systems.
MSL714 Organizational Dynamics and Environment
3 Credits (3-0-0) MSL718 Management of Blockchain Technology
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Module I : Organisational systems vix. a vis., the environment. Fundamental building blocks of blockchain. Concepts of distributed
The dialectics of agency and structure- extent of environmental and databases, blocks, encryption, and overall scope of blockchain,
organizational control. External control of organization. Organizations Understanding implications and applications of blockchain
and the new institutionalism. Systems for managing chaos and conflict. characteristics like decentralization, immutability, transparency,
disintermediation, sharability, privacy, security, authentication,
Module II : Constituent systems for organizational functioning-
traceability, auditability, data integrity and efficiency,Applications in
planning, learning, organising, communication and control systems.
agriculture; banking; management; finance, capital markets, services;
Organizational systems and mechanisms related to technology. Systems
governments; high-tech enterprises; etc
for managing strategy, and structure related to new technology.
Module III : Systems for managing continuous and radical change MSL719 Statistics for Management
for organizational renewal and transformation. Adaptiveness and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
flexibility in organisational systems. Systems for managing collective
action within the organization. Feminism and organizational systems Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
for managing gender diversity. Nature and role of statistics for management. Types of data, data
measurement scales, Descriptive Statistics: Measures of Central
MSL715 Quality and Environment Management Systems
Tendency, Measures of Dispersion. Introduction to probability
3 Credits (3-0-0) theory. Probability Theory: Preliminary concepts in Probability, Basic
Theorems and rules for dependent/independent events, Random
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Variable, Probability distributions. Sampling Techniques, Sampling
Module I : Concept of Total Quality, Quality Management Systems as
distributions. Hypothesis testing: Z-test, t-test, ANOVA, Chi-square
a means of achieving total quality. Linkage of Quality and Environment
tests, Correlation and regression analysis. Business Forecasting. SPSS
Management System. Strategic concern for Environment. Need and
and its use for statistical modeling.
relevance of documentation and standardization of Management
Systems. Various tools of documenting and recording the Management MSL720 Macroeconomic Environment of Business
Systems, Various standards for Management Systems. Flexibility and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
change in Management Systems and documented procedures.
Module II : Quality Management Systems, IS0 9000, Quality Policy, Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Data, Records and Traceability. Documenting the Quality System: Introduction to macroeconomic environment of business,
Quality Manual, Quality Audit, Design and Change Control, ISO 9000 Macroeconomic policies and Business Cycles, Economic Growth
Registration. Six Sigma. Awards and appreciation, DMAIC approach. vs. Economic Development, Measurement of macroeconomic
Module III : Need for proper Environment Management Systems performance, Classical Macroeconomic Theory, Keynesian Model
and their economic implications. Environment Management Income determination, Great Depression of 1930s; South East Asian
Systems, Green Products and Strategies, Environment Assessment: Crisis of 90s, Sub-prime Crisis of 2007 and Euro crisis and Fiscal
Environment Protection Act, ISO 14000, Case Studies. Sustainability; and their impact on the Business. Economic Reforms
in India, Growth pattern of Indian economy, Fiscal Policy and its
MSL716 Fundamentals of Management Systems managerial implications to the industry, Government Budget, Monetary
3 Credits (3-0-0) policy analysis and its implications to industry. Industrial Policy of India,
Competition Policy of India, Balance of Payments, WTO and India.
Module I : Basics and Variants. The concept of a system, Systems
Approach to management. Emerging paradigm, customer centred
MSL721 Econometrics
management systems, Flexible Management Systems. Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of Paradoxes. Management Systems in various countries: Western
Management Systems, Japanese Management Systems, Chinese Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Management System,Indian Management Systems. Organisational Introduction to Econometrics, Simple linear regression model. Multiple
Culture and Value System. linear regression model, Discrete Choice, Panel Data,Time Series,
Module II : Management Systems in Operation: Strategic Planning Stationarity, VAR, Co-integration and Error correction models.
241

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
MSL722 Managing Enterprise AI/ML Systems specifications. The student would gain practical experience through
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) a project as part of a term paper.
Overview to models for Enterprise AI/ML applications and objectives; MSL727 Interpersonal Behavior & Team Dynamics
Different types of intelligent algorithms; managing supervised, semi
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
supervised and unsupervised algorithms; Building enterprise data
models for AI/ML applications; Emergence of new intelligent models Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
and their outcome. On completion of this course, students would be able to: Understand
Managing Neural Networks based applications, Managing Bio the nature, structure and formation of teams. Appreciate the
Inspired and swarm based applications; Managing tradeoffs between competitive and collaborative dynamics between teams and sub-
computational and data challenges; Managing large scale applications teams. Understand and apply techniques for building and sustaining
like AI Chat-bots, recommender systems, social CRM systems high performing teams. Reflect on their roles within teams and its
management and policy interventions, Managing adverse outcome in impact on other members.
AI/ML applications; mitigation of risk for adverse outcome; Interventions
for policy making and governance; Addressing transparency, MSL728 International Telecommunication Management
fairness, explainability and accountability in enterprise applications. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module I : Historical development and evolution of telecom,
MSL723 Telecommunications Systems Management
managerial issues and structure of industry; evolution and role
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of international institutions; global trends in liberalization and
Module I : Telecom Technology Systems Evolution: Recent de-regulations, Patterns of Transaction in international telecom
Developments in Telecom Industry, Regulation & Liberalization management; managing the market growth; developing, operating
policy. Techno-managerial aspects of telecommunication, role of and monitoring regulation issues.
the telecommunication managers in a dynamic environment. The Module II : Role of telecommunications in socio-economic
business of telecommunication; telecommunication as a facilitating development; ICT & Social change, new technologies and services
infrastructure for economic development of the country, technical for international telecommunications; data services and business
survey of the ways and means that voice, data and video traffic are applications, Telecom prospectus of WTO & other international bodies.
moved long distances, data network, the telephone system.
Module III : Current issues and organisational growth; telecom
Module II : Issues of the monopolization and deregulation of implications for the industry, value added services and market drives;
telecom, national telecom policy, various institutions/organizations like regional prospectives on development of telecom; Human Resources
telecom regulatory authority etc; conveyance. Telecom service costing, Planning and Industrial relations in ITSM; skill formation for ITSM
economic evaluation of telecom projects, telecom project financing. and learning renewal, future directions of growth.
Module III : Telecom marketing, building brand equity for
competitive advantage, Customer care, total service quality MSL729 Individual Behavior in Organization
management, preparing for the new millennium managing change 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
and people development.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL724 Business Communication This course will focus on understanding the nature, composition and
relevance of organizational behaviour. Students will be introduced to
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
the fundamental concepts and theories underpinning organizational
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 behaviour. For every concept / theory introduced, its application for
On completion of this course, students would be able to: Evaluate the organizations would be discussed.
key purposes of communication in business. Explain the communication
process model and the barriers to effective communication. MSL730 Managing With power
Understand & evaluate the changing landscape of business 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
communication. Apply techniques for effective communication.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL725 Business Negotiations This course covers power dynamics, the basic art of influencing,
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) types of power, display of power at various levels and power vs
empowerment and ethics. Various cases and readings are included
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 for deeper understanding and application of the learnings.
Students who complete this course would be able to: (a) Understand the
nature, process and structure of negotiations. (b) Understand different MSL731 Developing Self Awareness
types of negotiations and the dynamics of cooperative and competitive 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
interaction in negotiations. (d) Appreciate and leverage their bargaining
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
position in a situation. (e) Learn and apply influence and persuasion
techniques. (f) Learn ways to build lasting working relationships. Important areas of self awareness: Personal values, moral maturity,
(g) Understand and appreciate ethical negotiations. cognitive styles, attitude towards change, Locus of control, social
needs of achievement, inclusion, control and affiliation.
MSL726 Telecom Systems Analysis, planning and Design
MSL733 Organization Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module I : An introduction to the basic system analysis tools,
the procedures for conducting system analysis advanced software Different issues related to the organization would be discussed and
principles, techniques and processes for designing and implementing then applied in real life situations, the emphasis will be on application
complex telecommunication systems. of theory to real life situations. The course would be imparted through
a combination of lectures, cases and simulation exercises.
Module II : Planning and implementation of telecommunications
systems from strategic planning through requirements, the initial
MSL734 Management of Small & Medium Scale
analysis, the general feasibility study, structured analysis, detailed
Industrial Enterprises
analysis, logical design, and implementation.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module III : Current system documentation through use of classical
and structural tools and techniques for describing flows, data flows, Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
data structures, file designs, input and output designs, and program Module I : MSME Act 2006; Nature of entrepreneurial management, the
242

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
new entrepreneur, his problems and prospects in the Indian environment. Module III : Implementation and Control. The marketing
Practical aspects of setting up and running of industrial enterprises organization- alternative organization structures; the concept of
including formulation of projects and feasibility study for new projects. product management. Administration of the marketing programme:
Module II : Raising resources for new enterprises. Location, sales forecasting; marketing and sales budgeting; sales management;
design, product and process. Choice of technique in small & medium management of sales force. Evaluation of marketing performance;
businesses. Survey needs for growth of the enterprise. Monitoring to sales analysis; control of marketing effort; marketing audit.
avoid sickness. Development and diversification.
MSL780 Managerial Economics
Module III : Integration with LSEs and MNCs. Informations network
for new enterprises. Implication of WTO to SMEs. Globalisation & 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Competitiveness of SMEs. Entrepreneurship in the globalisation era.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL735 Qualitative Methods in Management Introduction to managerial economics. Basic concepts, Consumer
behavior, Demand analysis: Determinants, estimation and managerial
Research
uses of elasticity of demand. Demand forecasting. Supply function
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and Market equilibrium analysis. Production and Cost analysis and
Qualitative research methods in management research - Philosophical Equilibrium of the firm, production Analysis, Productivity Analysis,
assumptions; Biography; Phenomenological study; Grounded Theory Production efficiency analysis. Pricing and output under different
Method; Ethnography; Case Study; Content Analysis; NVivo/Atlas Ti; market situations: Perfect Competition, Monopolistic Competition,
Narrative Analysis; Template analysis; Writing. Monopoly, Oligopoly and Cartels.
MSL740 Quantitative Methods in Management MSL781 Macroeconomic Dynamics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 Dynamic Optimization Methods: Deterministic Models, Dynamic
Module I : Role of quantitative methods and operations research Programming under Certainty with Applications, Deterministic
for managerial decision making and support. Role of mathematical Dynamics, Stochastic Models, Markov Processes, Stochastic
models in problem formulation and solving. Structure of decisions, Dynamic Programming with Applications, Competitive Equilibrium
statistical decision theory; decision making under uncertainty, risk, with Applications; Simple Aggregate Models: Dynamics in AD-AS
certainty. Decision Trees; Fuzzy Decision Making. Game theoretic Model, Dynamic Models of Output and Inflation, Introduction to
applications. Mathematical Programming models- formulation and Expectations: Adaptive vs. Rational Expectations, Micro-Foundations
applications. Linear Programming- graphical method, Simplex in Modern Macroeconomics; Open Economy Extensions: Introduction
technique; transportation, assignment and transshipment problems. to Dynamics of Small Open Economies, Exchange Rate Dynamics;
Mixed Integer Programming. Optimal Growth Models: the Solow Growth Model, Neo-classical
Module II : Non-Linear Programming, introduction to Quadratic Growth Model, Growth with Overlapping Generations, Endogenous
Programming, Geometric Programming and Direct Search techniques. technological Change, Stochastic Growth Models; Introduction to
Multiple Criteria Decision making- Goal programming, TOPSIS and AHP. DSGE Models: Stylized facts on Business Cycles, Calibration, Hodrick-
Prescott Filter, Limitations and Critiques.
Module III : Sequential decisions using Dynamic Programming.
PERT and CPM. Queuing theory- M/M/1 and M/M/n model. Monte
MSL782 Business Cycles and Global Economy
Carlo System Simulation concepts and applications. Brief introduction
to Non-traditional optimization. Case Study applications and use of 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
OR software packages. Economy moves in cycles. Depending on the state of economy
(in whether expansion or downturn), the firms should adjust their
MSL745 Operations Management business and investment strategies. This course will look into the
3 Credits (3-0-0) state of art of business cycles under the increasingly integrated
global economic system, and discuss the usefulness and application
Module I : Managing operations; planning and design of production
of the cyclical analyses for the appropriate and flexible decision
and operations systems. Service characteristics. Facilities planning-
making. Global business cycles; short and long cycles; fluctuation;
location, layout and movement of materials. Line balancing. Analytical
synchronization; identification, driver and nature of cyclical
tools and techniques for facilities planning and design.
movements; endogenous and exogenous views; political economy;
Module II : Production forecasting. Aggregate planning
role of manufacturing; transmission mechanism; trend analysis;
and operations scheduling, Production Planning and Control.
structural shift in the global system; China; India; forecasting and
Purchasing, Materials Management and Inventory control and JIT
indicators; COVID-19.
Material Requirements Planning. MRPII, ERP, Optimization techniques
applications.
MSL783 Global Economic Development
Module III : Work Study, Value Engineering, Total quality &
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
statistical process control. Maintenance management and equipment
policies. Network planning and control. Line of Balance, World class The course will discuss the shift in the global economic power,
manufacturing and factories of the future, Case studies. necessary and enabling conditions for the strong economic growth
and national development under the globalized world, and its
MSL760 Marketing Management implication for the business. Economic development; capitalism; world
economy; theory and empirical evidences; structural shift; industrial
3 Credits (3-0-0)
revolution; modernization; rise and decline of the West and Japan;
Module I : Introduction to Marketing function; genesis, the marketing
China as emerging power; economic structure; elasticity; colonialism;
concept. Marketing Management System: objectives, its interfaces
Bretton Woods institutions; globalization; currency war; trade war;
with other functions in the organisation. Environment of Marketing-
secular stagnation; long cycles; economic and financial crises; uneven
Political Environment Economic Environment, Market segmentation
sectorial development; business opportunity.
Consumer buying behaviour. Socio-cultural environment. Legal
Environment. Ethical issues in marketing.
MSL784 Sovereign Debt and Default
Module II : Marketing Strategy- Marketing planning and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Marketing programming. The concept of marketing mix, Product
policy; the concept of product life cycle. New product decisions. Pre-requisite(s): MSL720
Test marketing- Pricing, Management of distribution: channels of Origin of money, banks, and the central banking; Sovereign debt;
distribution. Advertising and promotions. The concept of Unique The role of borrowing; External and foreign currency borrowing;
Selling Proposition. Sovereign default: A historical perspective; Theoretical models of
243

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
default (e.g., reputation); Laws and economics of sovereign default and recognizing venture value, structuring financing for the growing
and restructuring; Sovereign debt and default- The International venture and finally the exit and turnaround strategies. Among these
Experience. broad six areas, there would be specific content and deliverables.
MSL799 Theories in IS Research MDL803 Fixed Income Securities
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
This is a research based course which will expose the Ph.D. scholars Pre-requisite(s): MSL708 for MBA, MSL302 for B. Tech students
to the advanced methods and theoretical models in information
The course covers types of debt securities, who are the market
systems management. Participants would be expected to understand
participants in the debt market, regulatory framework, and how
a lot of emergent theories and research methods in the information
debt market in linked to the macroeconomic environment. It covers
systems domain. Pedagogy would be seminar and discussion based on
basic features of the debt market instruments, their valuation, yield
exhaustive set of readings compiled on high impact research papers.
measures, duration and convexity measures, and term structure of
interest rates. The course covers simple bonds, bonds with embedded
MDL800 Management of Blockchain Technologies
options and asset-backed securities, arbitrage-free valuation, reduced
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) and structure models of credit risk, interest rate derivatives, and
Pre-requisite(s): MSL713 construction of bond portfolios and how performance of bond
portfolios in evaluated.
(about 100 words; Topics to appear as course contents in the
courses of Study booklet) (Include Practical / Practice activities):
MDL804 Behavioural Science
Fundamental building blocks of blockchain. Concepts of initiating
a blockchain project and management challenges surrounding 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
complexity assessment, feasibility assessment, deployment,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL302 or MSL708
maintenance and technology upgradation. Understanding managerial
This course aims to acquaint students with the area of Behavioral
implications of blockchain characteristics on adoption and diffusion in
Finance. We begin by understanding the classical rational finance
firms. Does the elements tie with Roger’s diffusion of innovation for
and then discuss the deviations from it. We then discuss some of
emerging technologies? How do these characteristics require specific
the common biases in humans and how they affects finance and
interventions in terms of organizational structures and relationships
the related aspects. We connect all of these to study the concept
among participating organizations? Understanding governance and
of prospect theory. We also introduce some market anomalies and
information management of blockchain characteristics, how can
their possible explanations using behavioral finance. To conclude, we
organization structure and networks play a role, understanding
develop framework on how we can mitigate these biases as investor
antecedents of diffusion of blockchain applications among firms and
and in firms.
networks in industries, understanding enablers and barriers to use
and usefulness of blockchain. Management case studies in corporate:
MDL805 Financial Technology
banking; digital services; high-tech enterprises; supply chain.
Management case studies in government and society, stakeholder 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
specific impacts assessment.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL302 or MSL708
This course aims to help students learn about Financial Technology or
MDD801 MBA project
Fin Tech. We discuss its evolution, interaction with finance, and the
3 Credits (0-0-6)
major technologies driving it. We study money and payment, digital
The topic for the major project would be a generic one, pertaining money and cryptocurrencies, and introduce the underlying Block chain
to a management problem/issue related to any functional area viz. and cryptography technologies. Applications in Investment and trading
finance, operations, strategy, HR, marketing, IT, econometrics etc. under the Fintech environment are discussed along with introduction
Latest management & research tools and techniques would be applied to data protection and privacy, cybersecurity and technological risk.
in the analysis. The project would also be evaluated by an external Multiple case studies provide a practical overview into the Fin Tech
expert. Each MBA project would be unique and the contents would development in developed and emerging markets. We also discuss
be decided on the advice of the project supervisor. the evolving nature of regulation that come with Fintech, including
Regtech and wrap up with ideas on how technology could continue
MDL801 Managing Digital Transformation to transform the careers and finance in the future.
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
MSL801 Technology Forecasting & Assessment
Pre-requisite(s): MSL713
Making sense of ‘digital’ and ‘digital transformation’, digital 3 Credits (3-0-0)
competencies and contested boundaries in the information age, data Module I : Forecasting as an input to technology planning, Futures
as catalyst for digital transformation, achieving customer centricity Research, Elements of forecasting process. Types of forecasting
through data integration, products vs. platforms and multi-sided methods. Quantitative methods of forecasting: time series models,
markets, dynamics of renewal through digital transformation, growth curves, Precursor, Envelope curves, Experience curves,
organizational alignment for digital transformation, balancing technical assessment.
g mainstream and new stream businesses coming from digital Module II : Qualitative methods: Morphological analysis, Relevance
channel, technology leadership at large firms, open innovation & trees, Delphi, Technological gap analysis, Analogy method, Organising
crowdsourcing, virtual reality, internet of things (IoT), AI, blockchain, for Technology Forecasting.
big data.
Module III : Technology assessment: Components, problem
Data Uses: legal and ethical considerations, such as data breaches,
definition, Social description, Measure, Impact assessment. Strategies
GDPR, and California data protection rules, Recent trends review and
for assessment, Economic impact analysis. Assessment of risk and
what the future holds.
uncertainty. Safety and environment considerations.
MDL802 Entrepreneurial Finance
MSp801 Interdisciplinary Research in Management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL 707 and 708 for MBA students, MSL302
Fundamentals of zinter / multi-disciplinary research, identify and
for B.Tech. Students understand complex problems, defining complex problems, designing
The course would broadly cover the entrepreneurial environment, inter-disciplinary research, conducting research in teams, preparing
organizing and operating the venture, planning for the future, creating a working draft of the paper.
244

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
MSV801 Selected Topics in OB & HR Management MSV803 Selected Topics in Information Technology
1 Credit (1-0-0) Management
The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research 1 Credit (1-0-0)
and practice in the area of OB & HR Management. The topics covered The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research
will vary with each offering of the course, and will be defined by the and practice in the area of Information Technology Management. The
faculty member teaching the course. topics covered will vary with each offering of the course, and will be
defined by the faculty member teaching the course.
MDD802 MBA project
MSL804 procurement Management
3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The topic for the major project would be a generic one, pertaining
to a management problem/issue related to any functional area viz. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
finance, operations, strategy, HR, marketing, IT, econometrics etc. This course will introduce students to purchasing and materials
Latest management & research tools and techniques would be applied management by learning the planning production process, master
in the analysis. The project would also be evaluated by an external scheduling, material requirements, and forecasting material demands
expert. Each MBA project would be unique and the contents would and inventory levels. This course is designed to build on the student’s
be decided on the advice of the project supervisor. The project would knowledge of how effective material management improves supply
need to focus on telecom sector. chain performance.
MSL802 Management of Intellectual property Rights MSV804 Selected Topics in Operations Management
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research
and practice in the area of Operations Management. The topics
Module I : Nature of Intellectual Property; Patents, Industrial
covered will vary with each offering of the course, and will be defined
Design, Trademark and Copyright; Process of patenting and
by the faculty member teaching the course.
development; technological research, innovation, patenting,
development; International cooperation on Intellectual Property;
International treaties on IPRs; Patenting under PCT. Procedure for MSL805 Services Operations Management
grants of patents. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module II : Scope of Patent Rights; Licensing and transfer of
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
technology; Patent information and databases; Geographical
This case course explores the dimensions of successful service firms. It
Indications.
prepares students for enlightened management and suggests creative
Module III : Administration of Patent System. New developments entrepreneurial opportunities. The main idea behind the course is:
in IPR; IPR of biological systems,plant varieties, computer softwares
To study “breakthrough” services in order to understand the
etc. Traditional knowledge; Case Studies; IPR and IITs.
operations of successful service firms that can be benchmarks for
future management practice.
MSV802 Selected Topics in Finance
To develop an understanding of the “state of the art” of service
1 Credit (1-0-0) management thinking.
The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research
To understand the dimensions of service growth both domestically
and practice in the area of Finance. The topics covered will vary
and internationally.
with each offering of the course, and will be defined by the faculty
member teaching the course.
MSV805 Selected Topics in Economics
1 Credit (1-0-0)
MDD803 MBA project
The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research
3 Credits (0-0-6)
and practice in the area of Economics. The topics covered will vary
The topic for the major project would be a generic one, pertaining with each offering of the course, and will be defined by the faculty
to a management problem/issue related to any functional area viz. member teaching the course.
finance, operations, strategy, HR, marketing, IT, econometrics etc.
Latest management & research tools and techniques would be applied MDL806 Derivatives
in the analysis. The project would also be evaluated by an external
Credits: 3 (3-0-0)
expert. Each MBA project would be unique and the contents would
be decided on the advice of the project supervisor. The project would Pre-requisite(s): MSL708 for MBA, MSL302 for B.Tech Students
need to focus on technology sector. This course covers how derivative markets function, how various
derivative securities are priced, their usage and the associated risks
MSL803 Technical Entrepreneurship with each. Specifically, this course focuses on forwards and futures,
and options on stocks, stock indices, currencies, and futures options.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
It covers binomial model and Black Scholes-Merton model for option
Module I : Basis and challenges of entrepreneurship Technological pricing, moves on to trading strategies using options, and finally Greek
entrepreneurship, Innovation and entrepreneurship in technology letters and volatility smiles. It briefly covers energy and commodity
based organisations, High tech. entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurial derivatives in the applications.
characteristics. Concept of new ventures. Technology absorption,
Appropriate technology. Networking with industries and institutions.
MSL806 Mergers & Acquisitions
Module II : Starting a new technological venture and developing the
3 Credits (3-0-0)
business: Business idea, Business plan, Marketing plan, Financial plan,
(i) Valuation & Financial framework of M&A. (ii) The strategic
Organisational plan. Financing a new Venture: Sources of Capital,
perspective of M&A. (iii) The managerial perspective of M&A.
Venture Capital, Going public. Enterprenrurship & liberalization.
Module III : Managing the new technological venture: Developing
MSV806 Selected Topics in Marketing Management
systems in new venture, Managing doing early operations, Growth
and expansion, ending the venture. Legal issues, Franchising and 1 Credit (1-0-0)
acquisition. Entrepreneurship, globalisation and Entrepreneurship. The course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research
245

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
and practice in the area of Marketing Management. The topics covered Situation Characteristics. Consecutive, Disjunctive and Compensatory
will vary with each offering of the course, and will be defined by the Decision Rules. Shopping Orientation, Nature of Unplanned Purchases,
faculty member teaching the course. Price Reduction and Promotional Deals, Marketing Strategy for
Dissatisfied Customers, Customer Satisfaction, Repeat Purchases,
MSL807 Selected Topics in Strategic Management and Customer Commitment, Effects of the Content of Commercial
Messa es, Consumer Protection and Regulation of Markets in India.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Open slot course (To be decided when the course is floated). The
MSL811 Management Control Systems
course will cover selected topics in emerging areas of research and
practice in the area of Strategic Management. The topics covered 3 Credits (3-0-0)
will vary with each offering of the course, and will be defined by the Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
faculty member teaching the course.
Module I : Nature of Management Control Systems: planning
and control process. Essentials of Management Control System.
MSL808 Systems Thinking Behavioural aspects of Management Control-motivation and
3 Credits (3-0-0) morale, goal congruency, and so on. Management Control Process:
Module I: Systems thinking in management; Hard and soft systems Programming, Budgetary Planning and Procedures, Fixed and
thinking; open systems thinking; Analytical and systems approaches; Flexible Budgeting, Zero Base Budgeting. Internal Audit and Internal
System concepts, principles and metaphors; General systems theory Control. Standard Cost Accounting Systems as measures of operating
and cybernetics. performance.
Module II: Theory building with causal loop diagrams; Feedback Module II : Variance Analysis and reporting of financial performance:
loop structures; Linking feedback, stock and flow structures; Tutorial Material, Labour and Overhead Cost Variances, Revenue Variances,
on Stella; Case Studies on system dynamics modelling. Profit Variances, Variance Reporting.
Module III: Soft systems methodology; Flexible systems thinking; Module III : Management Control Structure: Responsibility
Management of continuity and change; Interpretive systems model. Accounting System- Concept of Responsibility Centre, Expense Centre,
Profit Centre, Investment Centre. Inter-Divisional Transfer Pricing
System, Measurement of Division Performance.
MDL809 Career Management Strategies
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
MSL812 Flexible Systems Management
Career competencies, career sustainability, cross-cultural management,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
managing diverse employees, entrepreneurial careers, new career
ecosystems such as AIpowered organizations and platform economy, Module I : Emerging management paradigms: Total Quality
reflective and competency development exercises. Management, Business Process Reengineering, Learning Organisation,
World Class Organisation, Flexibility in Management. Concept of
systemic flexibility. Liberalisation, Globalisation and change. New
MSL809 Cyber Security: Managing Risks
Organisation forms.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module II : Concept and dimensions of Systemic flexibility. Managing
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 paradoxes. Methodology and tools of flexible systems management.
This course introduces students to the interdisciplinary field of Underlying values, and guiding principles, Case Analysis using SAP-
cybersecurity by discussing the following: cybersecurity theory, LAP framework. SAP-LAP models and linkages.
and the relationship of cybersecurity to nations, businesses, Module III : Flexibility in functional systems, Information Systems
society, and people, cybersecurity technologies, processes, and flexibility, manufacturing flexibility, organisational flexibility,
procedures, analyzing threats, vulnerabilities and risks present in financial flexibility, and strategic flexibility. Linkage of flexibility with
these environments, and develop appropriate strategies to mitigate organisational performance.
potential cybersecurity problems, advanced policy related topics would
also be covered through which these risks may be mitigated. Other MSL813 Systems Methodology for Management
relevant advanced topics may be explored.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module I : Introduction to systems methodology, Flexible Systems
MSL810 Advanced Data Mining for Business Decisions
Methodology, Need and applicability of Systems methodology for
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) management. Nature of managerial problems. System Dynamics
Methodology- Philosophy, Foundation, Steps, building blocks,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
feedback structures, principles of systems, learning organisation.
This course will expose the participants to the following topics
within this domain: Understanding advanced models of data mining, Module II : Validation, Simulation and testing of System Dynamics
advanced unsupervised mining methods and approaches, Decision models, Policy analysis, Micro world and Management games,
Support Systems, Group Decision Support Systems, Consensus based Managerial applications of Systems methodology.
systems, Multi-criteria decision systems, Knowledge management Module III : Management of physical systems. Physical system theory:
systems, knowledge management methods, Intelligent systems, fundamental premises and postulates, modelling of basic processes,
Hybrid data mining methods, Advanced and emergent topics and application to manufacturing, managerial, and socio-economic
applications. systems. Critical comparison and integration of Physical System
Theory and System Dynamics. Flexibility in physical system theory.
MDL810 Consumer Behavior
MSL814 Data Visualization
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL760
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Changing Society, Family Structures and Consumerism. Values
and Consumption Patterns. Company, Consumer, and Competition. This course would have the following: It would train the participants
Consumer Decisions, External Influences. Internal Influences. to use visual imagery to present complex information and the trends
Variations in Cultural Values, Self and Environment Oriented associated with extensive data. Visualization provides a solution to
Values, Green Marketing. Gender based Marketing. Understanding address information overload, through a well-designed visual encoding
Different Generations of Consumers. Nominal. Limited and Extended to aid comprehension, memory, and decision making. Furthermore,
Decision Making Discovering and Responding to Consumer Problems visual representations may help engage more diverse audiences in
Suppressing ProblemI Recognition, Market, Product. Consumer, and the process of analytic thinking. Topics like data and image models,
246

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
heat maps, infographics, multidimensional data visualization and MSV817 Art of Scholarship in Management Research
representation, graphical perceptions, mapping & cartography and 1 Credit (1-0-0)
text visualization may be covered. Other relevant topics within the
Understanding the role of a scholar in society, Knowing various
subject domain may also be explored.
aspects of ‘Body of Knowledge’, Understanding the purpose and
structure of Academic Bodies in the management discipline, Various
MSL815 Decision Support and Expert Systems
forms of scholarly outlets (symposium, workshop, seminar, conclave,
3 Credits (3-0-0) conference, summit, meet, reviews, communications, journals, open
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 etc.), Prevalent Style and methods of scholastic writing, Assessing
value of scholarly publications (prevailing Indices & Impact factors),
Module I : The management support framework for computers.
Pre and Post internet scenarios, Interaction with an established
Fundamentals of decision theory and decision modelling. Humans
scholar.
and information processors and information systems as decision
systems. Human decision styles.
MSL818 Industrial Waste Management
Module II : Models, heuristics, and simulation. Overview of DSS-
3 Credits (3-0-0)
database, modelbase, user interface. DSS development methodology
and tools. Need for expertise in decision models and expert systems. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Expert systems fundamentals. Knowledge engineering, knowledge Module I : The concept of industrial system. Systems waste and
representation and inferencing. Building expert systems. waste management. Wastivity and productivity measurement. The
Module III : Integrating expert systems and DSSs. Strategies for categories of industrial systems waste. Stages and causes of waste
implementing and maintaining management support systems. Case generation in industrial systems. Waste reduction measures and
studies, and laboratory and filed projects. systems in industry. Collection and disposal system of scrap, surplus
and obsolete items. Recycling and processing of industrial waste.
Industrial pollution and environment control.
MSV815 Case Study Writing and Teaching
Module II : Value engineering, design waste and cost reduction.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Inspection rejects and quality management. Reliability, maintenance,
Various concepts of case study teaching and writing will be covered.
breakdown and management of waste. Space waste and layout
planning. Time management, manpower waste in industry,
MSL816 Total Quality Management
absenteeism. Capacity utilization. Waste heat recovery and energy
3 Credits (3-0-0) waste in industry. Resource conversation/loss prevention in process
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 industries. Data and information waste, management of hazardous
waste. Waste treatment. Natural calamities. Accident prevention,
Module I : Introduction to TQM; Customer Orientation, Continuous
industrial safety and waste management.
Improvement, Quality, Productivity and Flexibility, Approaches and
philosophies of TQM, Quality Awards, Strategic Quality Management, Module III : Waste management in Indian industries- present
TQM and corporate culture, Total Quality Control; Basic Analytical practices, potentials and perspectives. Management of waste in
tools-Check Sheets; Histograms; Pareto charts, Cause and Effect different industrial systems- steel, aluminum, power, automobile,
diagrams; Flow charts. transport and other service industries. Economic analysis and system
models of industrial waste management systems. Analytical and
Module II : Statistical Process Control; Advanced Analytical tools-
Creative techniques to waste control.
Statistical Design of Experiments; Taguchi Approach; Cost of Quality;
Reliability and failure analysis. FMECA, Quality Function Deployment,
Benchmarking, Concurrent Engineering. MSV818 Contemporary Issues in OB & HR Management
Module III : Quality Teams, Employee practices in TQM 1 Credit (1-0-0)
organisations: Leadership, delegation; empowerment and motivation; The contents of the course around selected contemporary topic(s)
role of communication in Total Quality, Quality Circles; Total Employee in HR and OB.
Involvement; Problem Solving in TQM- Brain storming; Nominal Group
Technique Team process; Kaizen and Innovation; Measurement and MSL819 Business process Re-engineering
audit for TQM; Quality Information Systems, ISO 9000 series of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Quality Standards; TQM Implementation; Reengineering and TQM.
Module I: Nature, significance and rationale of Business Process
Reengineering, Reengineering scenarios in major countries, Problems
MSV816 Contemporary Issue in Management
issues, scope and trends in BPR, Implementing BPR: Methodology
1 credit (1-0-0) and steps, IT enabled reengineering, mediation and collaboration.
The content of the course around a selected advance tropic in
Module II: The paradigm of Mass customization, managing
Management
organisational change, Transforming/Reinventing the enterprise, Team
building. Case studies of success as well as failure.
MSL817 Systems Waste & Sustainability
Module III: People view, empowering people, reengineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
management. Issues of purpose, culture, process and performance,
Module I : Introduction to waste and waste management. The and people.
concept of wastivity and its inter-relationship with Productivity
Quality and Flexibility. Systems concept of waste, complementarily
MSV819 Contemporary Issues in Finance
of waste and resource management. Functional elements of waste
1 Credit (1-0-0)
management. Waste management and cost reduction. Taxonomy of
wastes, JIT, TQM and waste. The contents of the course would be built around the particular
nuance and/or emerging perspective.
Module II : Management of waste in industrial and service sectors.
Management of manpower waste and unemployment. Management
MSL820 Global Business Environment
of energy waste in the national economy. Energy recycling, Waste
management and energy conservation. Total energy concept, overall 3 Credits (3-0-0)
energy wastivity. Module I : Global Scene. Historical and economic background, firms
Module III : Interfaces of waste management: environment control, and International Business. The global scene and the challenges
nature conservation, resource development, Quality and Productivity ahead, challenges to free International Trade Political Risk, Protection,
Management, Business Process Reengineering. Role of legislation and Accounting, Taxation and Legal practices. The International debt risks.
government. Waste management and national planning. Module II : Regional Issues. Global Monetary Institutions and
247

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
Trade Agreements, Regional Trade Agreements and Facts. Socio- MSL823 Strategic Change & Flexibility
cultural context of International Business: European countries, U.S.A. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
developing of newly industrialized countries and Japan. Management
Module I : Patterns of Change and Flexibility. Patterns of change,
of Multinational firms.
liberalization, globalization and privatization, changes in Social Political
Module III : Globalization of Indian Economy. Liberalization and and Economic environment, Technological and organizational change.
globalization of Indian business. India’s multinationals, Indian laws Changes in customer requirements. Impact of change of business
and policies relating to investment in India by international firms and and workforce. Need for flexibility, concept of Strategic Flexibility:
outside India by Indian firms. Openness, Adaptiveness, Change, and Resilience. Understanding
the process of strategic change. Managing chaos strategically.
MSV820 Contemporary Issues in IT Management Regenerating strategies.
1 Credit (1-0-0) Module II : Revising Strategies Postures. Corporate restructuring,
The contents of the course around a selected advanced topic in Alliances, joint ventures, acquisitions and merges. Reorganising
information technology and systems. the firm, the impact of mergers and acquisitions on organizational
performance. Management of continuity and change, Blue
MSL821 Strategy Execution Excellence Ocean strategy.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Module III : Energising Strategies Change. Reengineering the
Maximize your leadership potential by expanding your management corporation, identification of key business processes. Organization
skills through this one-year graduate certificate management program. of the future. Implementing Strategic Change. Transforming
This comprehensive program offers you the opportunity to broaden the organization. Sustaining change. Consolidating gains and
your perspective on salient management responsibilities and skills in producing more change. Anchoring new approaches in the culture.
key sectors such as health care, not-for-profit, community services, Leading a high-commitment high-performance organization.
and technology and trades. Students must also participate in two Organization Vitalizations
weekend residency (virtual or on-campus) activities. This program
enables you to leverage your existing career and educational MSL824 policy Dynamics & Learning Organization
experiences to move into management positions. You will take a series
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of carefully selected business courses that will build and enhance your
Module I : Learning Organization. Emergence of learning
skills in critical areas of management such as finance, marketing,
organization. Strategies for organization learning, using Feedback,
human resources, and leadership. In addition, you will have the
shared vision, team work, personal mastery, mental models, systems
option to select courses from specific industry streams-health care,
thinking, role of leader, organizational dynamics. Soft Systems
community services, not-for-profit, and trades/technology. These
Methodology application to policy formulation. Flexibility in policy
courses are designed to provide industry-specific perspectives that
strategy. Strategy formulation in a learning organisation, clarifying
ill enhance your employability and career advancement.
vision and opportunities for change in a learning organization.
MSV821 Contemporary Issues in Operations Management Module II : Micro World and Policy Dynamics. Systems-linked
1 Credit (1-0-0) organization model. Micro world for policy learning. System Dynamics
modeling applied to policy formulations, conceptual model. The
The content of the course around a selected advance tropic in
language of systems thinking links and qualitative system dynamics,
Operations & Supply Chain Management.
Flexibility Influence Diagram, Collaboration Diagram, Archetypes,
leverage points, Integrative simulation models.
MSL822 International Business
Module III : Frontiers. Role playing games and case studies to
3 Credits (3-0-0)
develop principles for successful management of complex strategies
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 in a dynamic world. Strategic Management game for policy planning,
Module I : Key Issues in International Business. Socio-cultural, Interactive Planning. Strategic issues such as business cycles, market
economic and political forces facing business. International sourcing. growth and stagnation. And diffusion of new technologies. Knowledge
Understanding the determinants of competitive advantage in management in learning organizations.
international business at the national, industry and firm level. Global
forces transforming international business. Multinational Corporation. MSV824 Contemporary Issues in Strategic Management
Problems and Prospects in an International Environment, competitive 1 Credit (1-0-0)
and cooperative business strategy.
The course addresses a number of current issues in strategic
Module II : International Business Strategy of Indian Industry. management, including but not limited to such topics as competitive
Competitive position of key Indian Industries. Entry strategies analysis, mergers and acquisitions, managerial ethics, global strategy,
for Indian firms: Joint Ventures, strategic/technical alliances/ and corporate culture. Emphasis is placed on the development of
collaboration. Strategies employed by Indian firms to develop and critical thinking skills.
sustain international business.
Module III : Globalization Strategy. Globalisation strategy, strategies MSL825 Strategies in Functional Management
of Multinational Corporation, implications for functional strategies:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
marketing, HR, planning, organisational structure, production, Global
Module I : Linkage of corporate and Business strategy with various
Information Systems, Strategy Alternatives for Global Market entry
Functional strategies, Flexibility in Functional Strategies. Marketing
and expansion, International negotiations.
Strategy, financial Strategy.
MSV822 Contemporary Issues in Economic policy Module II : Manufacturing Strategy, IT Strategy, Human Resources
Strategy.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Module III : Technology Strategy, Quality and Productivity Strategy,
The course will concentrate on contemporary important economic
Environmental Strategy.
policy issues. The specific topics will be of current economic policy
interest. The topics covered are to include some of the following
MSL826 Business Ethics
topics but not limited to: 1. Fiscal Policy Issues, Taxation and Inter
State Relations 2. Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Frameworks 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3. Issues Related to Poverty and Inequality 4. Financial Integration Module I : Ethics in Business. Historical perspective, culture and
and Currency Unions 5. International Trade Policies, Globalization and ethics in India, codes and culture. Economics and the Environment:
Implications on Welfare 6. Technological Change and Innovations 7. green business, Ethics and Competition. The ethical code, social
Climate Change and policy Alternatives. audit. A framework for analysis and action. The sphere of personal
248

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
ethics: consequences, rights and duties, virtue and character. Role of MSL830 Organizational Structure and processes
objectivity, practicability, judgement and balancing acts. The individual 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and the corporation.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module II : Ethical Responsibilities. Ethical responsibilities of
economic agents: role obligations, obligation to sharesholder, rights Module I : Organisational structure- classical and neoclassical
and, obligations to customers, obligations to pay taxes. Environmental theories. Strategy and structure. Modern Organizational theory-
protection. Corporate accountability, Ethical conflicts, concern for the systems view of organisation and integration. Micro, intermediate,
locality, Attitude to labour. Ethics and Government policies and laws. macro environment. Participative structures.
Module III : Ethics in Functions. Ethical responsibilities of Module II : Work culture and organization processes. Decision
organizations leader: power, leadership. Obstacles to ethical conduct. processes, balance and conflict processes. The process of role and
Pressures for conformity. Evaluation and rewards. Job pressures and status development. Influence processes and technological processes.
issues. Organizational change. Ethics in use of Information technology. Capacity development in organizations.
Intellectual Property Rights. Ethics in Marketing. Ethics of advertising Module III : Interface of structure and processes- structural
and sponsorship. Freedom Vs State Control. Acquisitions and Mergers, functionalism; Allport and Event- Structure theory. Organizational
Multinational decision making: Reconciling International norms. Governance- organizations as a subject of political enquiry, Models
of organizational governance. Making and breaking patterns.
MSV826 Frontiers in OB & HR Management
1 credit (1-0-0) MSL831 Management of Change
The contents of the course would be built around the particular 3 Credits (3-0-0)
nuance and/or emerging frontier.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL827 International Competitiveness Module I : Process of change and organization theory and practice.
Elements of change. Achieving Systematic change. Domains of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
systematic change-strategy, technology, structure and people.
Module I : Introduction to Competitiveness. Background,
Planning for change.
Need, Basics, Myths; Global Perspectives, Context, Definitions,
Benchmarking & Key Issues; Related concepts: Excellence, Value Module II : Change and the use of power. Nature and sources of
Creation; Competitiveness at Different Levels. power. Leadership and change- Transactional vs. Transformational
change. Change cycle including participative and coerced change.
Module II : Evaluating & Planning for Competitiveness. Frameworks
of Competitiveness & Strategy, Evaluating Competitiveness, Enhancing Module III : Change through behaviour modification. Positive and
Competitiveness, Competitiveness Processes & Initiatives, Leadership negative reinforcement. Training for change. Managing conflict.
Dimension, Cases. Implementing change. Adjustment to change and organising for
Module III : Practitioners Perspectives. Business Models growth. Prerequisites and consequence of change. The change
for Competitiveness, Functional (e.g. HR, Operational, Dynamics.
Financial, Technological) Linkages, Partnerships/Cooperation for
MSL832 Managing Innovation for Organizational
Competitiveness, Emerging Issues/Practices.
Effectiveness
MSV827 Frontiers in Finance 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
The contents of the course would be built around the particular
Module I : Elements of creativity person, creative organization,
nuance and/or emerging frontier.
nature of innovation. Assessing creativity. Tools and techniques for
enhancing creativity. Innovation and risk.
MSL828 Global Strategic Management
Module II : Managing social equity and organisation efficiency
3 Credits (3-0-0)
paradox, blocks to creativity, methods to overcome the blocks.
Module I : The Process of Globalization and Global Strategy. Introducing creativity in organisation. Structure and creativity. Work
Globalization of markets and competition, globalization and localization, culture and innovation.
Diagnosing Global Industry Potential, Designing a global strategy,
Module III : Practices of creativity and intervention strategies-
Making Global strategies work, Global strategic alliances, M&A.
organization excellence: Criteria and practice-innovation and quality,
Module II : Regional Strategy and Entry Strategy. Regional Strategy,
Innovation and BPR/appraisal system- interventions. Innovation
Emerging Markets Assessing Country Attractiveness, Entry Strategies:
and competitiveness.
Subsidiaries, acquisitions, joint ventures, Licensing, Franchising,
Agents and Distributors.
MSV832 Frontiers in Strategic Management
Module III : Managing Globally and Future Challenges. Designing a
1 credit (1-0-0)
global organization, Global Marketing and Operations, Cross Cultural
Management, Leadership and Global manager, Globalization and the The contents of the course shall be around a selected advanced topic
Internet. in strategic management area
MSV828 Frontiers in Information Systems Management MSL833 Organizational Development
1 Credit (1-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Series of focused topics in any emerging area of Information Systems. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
The topics may evolve based on the expertise of the expert invited Module I : Organisation Development- nature and scope. The generic
for delivering the course, with due discussion with the area. The and contextual element of developing organisation. Introduction to
topics would cover emerging issues in information systems, from process change. Theories, strategies and techniques of organizational
both a theory and practice point of view. Further it may expose the diagnosis for improving organisation’s problem solving and renewal
participants on the challenges and critical success factors in the process, legacy factors and organizational growth.
domain being explored.
Module II : Coping with environmental change. Socio-cultural
dimensions of work and behaviour, Environmental analysis and
MSL829 Current and Emerging Issues in Strategic
impact. Diagnosis of the ongoing process from symptoms to causes.
Management Organisation development and intervention strategies.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Module III : Personal change. Laboratory learning techniques.
(Relevant current and Emerging Issues) Managerial Grid. Sensitivity training. Transactional analysis.
249

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
Inter-group and team building interventions. Management by learning the three aspects of supply chain planning and design. The
objectives. Total system interventions-stabilising change. first one is Descriptive Analytics of supply chain, which focuses on
fundamental tools and methods on data analysis and statistics, visual
MSL834 Managing Diversity at Workplace representations of data and data modeling. The second major focus
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) is on Predictive Analytics of supply chain, which develops approaches
for building and analyzing predictive models, applying regression,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
forecasting techniques, simulation and risk analysis, etc. The third
The course introduces students to the relational framework towards major focus is on Prescriptive Analytics of supply chain, which aims
diversity management by discussing the macro, meso and micro at arriving at optimal decisions for the different future scenarios in
factors influencing DM. Through analysis of the different organizational the supply chain.
approaches and initiatives towards diversity management, it highlights
ways in which inclusive workplaces can be created and diversity MSL842 Supply Chain Modeling
leveraged for business performance.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL835 Labor Legislation and Industrial Relations Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
3 Credits (3-0-0) This course primarily deals with understanding and analyzing
problems underlying the design, planning and operation of supply
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
chains, with a special emphasis on the logistical and other issues
Module I : Introduction of industrial relation and a systematic view related to the material and the information flow in these systems. The
of personnel. Labour Relations. Introduction to Indian Trade Unionism. main objective of the course is to introduce methodological description
Industrial relations and conflict in industries. Introduction of Labour of the various issues in supply chain related to design, planning and
Regulation Act, Factories Act, Trade Union Act, and Safety Act. control problems. Mathematical models and techniques are used
Module II : Role of Industrial Legislation. Introduction of Industrial to support the analysis of the identified issues. It also develops
Dispute Act. Different jurisdiction of Labour Court. Issues in understanding of some basic tools that can support the functioning
recognition of unions. Tribunal and national tribunal. Strategies for of the analytical methodologies.
resolving Industrial Conflict, Collective bargaining. Works committee
and joint consultative committee, Negotiation process. MSL843 Supply Chain Logistics Management
Module III : Influence of Government regulations. Third party 3 Credits (3-0-0)
intervention in industrial disputes. Rules of grievances. Discipline in
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Industry. Contribution of tripartite bodies. Labour Welfare Participative
Module I : Perspective of Supply Chain Logistics Management.
Management. Workman’s Compensation Act. Productivity in Industry.
Logistics concept, role and scope; Logistics Environment- Integrating
Healthy industrial relations and economic development.
Logistics of Supply, Logistics of Production and Logistics of
Distribution. Internal and external factors for logistics strategy,
MSL836 International Human Resources Management
Operational Resources of logistics (personnel, warehouse means of
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
transport, warehouse transport aids, organizational aids, material
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 stocks, and area/spare) Effective supply chain management, customer
The course would cover issues pertaining to selecting, managing and networking and manufacturing, Risk Pooling, Postponement, cross
developing international workforce. It would sensitize students to docking in supply chain, CPFR, IT-enabled supply chains value of
the cross-cultural issues faced by global organizations and emerging Information, Coordination in SCM.
issues within international HRM. Lectures, small group discussions Module II : Logistics Activity Mix. JIT and Logistics, Synchronised
and case study analysis would be the primary teaching methods manufacturing. Purchasing and Materials Management. Distributional
adopted in this course. logistical systems and facilities-single stage or multistage,
warehouse(s), their number, location and allocation, Automated
MSL839 Current and Emerging Issues in Organizational Warehousing, Materials Handling and Packaging. Simulation aided
Management planning of conveyor and warehousing systems.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Module III : Supply Chain Logistics Mix Management. Logistical
Connectivity: Transportation modes, rate structure, legal aspects;
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
maintenance, spares and repairs; test and support equipment,
(Relevant current and Emerging Issues)
Routing of freight flows. Management and Organization of the
Logistics Systems; Organization, Information and cost control;
MSL840 Manufacturing Strategy
Logistical information Systems, Computer aided logistics management.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Case Studies.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL844 Systems Reliability, Safety and Maintenance
Module I : Manufacturing and operations strategy-relevance and
Management
concepts. Strategic issues in manufacturing & operations, Capacity
planning, International innovations in manufacturing. Choice of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
technology and manufacturing process in the prevailing environment. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module II : Technology-manufacturing process interfaces with
Module I : Reliability, Safety, Risk Assessment Perspective.
marketing, engineering, quality, purchasing, finance and accounting.
Introduction to reliability, availability and safety engineering and
Inter-relationship among manufacturing manager and their suppliers,
management. Select statistical concepts and probability distributions.
customers, competitors, superiors and production workers.
Optimization techniques for systems reliability, availability and safety.
Module III : Strategic implications of Experience Curve. Focused Reliability, availability, safety and maintainability. Risk assessment and
manufacturing-green, lean and mean. Strategic issues in project management for reliability and safety.
management and implementation of manufacturing policies.
Module II : Maintenance Planning and Control.
Perspectives of Manufacturing Strategy. Case Studies.
Maintenance management objectives and functions. Classification of
MSL841 Supply Chain Analytics Maintenance system. Maintenance Planning and Scheduling. Issues of
Replacement versus reconditioning and imperfect repair maintenance
3 Credits (3-0-0)
models. Spare parts Inventory Planning and Control for single and
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 multi-echelon systems. Diagnostic tools of failure analysis: Failure
This course will introduce students to supply chain analytics by Mode Effect and Criticality Analysis, Fault Tree Analysis.
250

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
Module III : Information System for Reliability, Safety and for designing a management research. Case study approach with
Maintenance Management. SWOT, SAP-LAP, value chain, PEST, etc. AHP, ANP modeling of risk
and uncertainty in management, real life case development with
Organizational aspects and a computer aided management
appropriate research design.
information system for reliability, safety and maintenance. Life cycle
costing and cost management for maintenance. Human factors in
MSL848 Applied Operations Research
maintenance, Maintenance Manpower Planning. Case Studies.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL845 Total project Systems Management
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
3 Credits (3-0-0) The objective of the course is to provide the students about the
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 application of Operations Research (OR) in various functional areas
of business such as operation, supply chain management, materials
Module I: Project Systems Management: a life cycle approach,
management, marketing, finance, and human resource. The entire
project characteristics; project life cycle phases: conception,
course is a case based where the participants will be given a case.
definition, planning and organising, implementation and project
Participants will be asked to tackle the case problem without using
clean up. Project feasibility analysis. The project manager: role and
OR using their own experience or any other logical method and then
responsibilities, Team Building and Conflict Management. Tools and
they will be asked to tackle the same situation applying OR. At the
techniques for project management. Environmental impact analysis
end of the course they will appreciate how OR can help the decision
of a project.
makers in an efficient decision making process.
Module II: Network techniques for project management-PERT,
CPM and GERT. Accounting for risk, uncertainty and fuzziness. Time
MSL849 Current and Emerging Issues in Manufacturing
cost tradeoffs and crashing procedures. Multi project planning and
Management
scheduling with limited resources. Multi objective, fuzzy and stochastic
based formulations in a project environment. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module III: Funds planning, performance budgeting and control. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Project materials management. Pricing, estimating, and Contract (Relevant current and Emerging Issues)
Administration and Management, Building and Bid evaluation and
analysis. Project implementation and monitoring, Project management MSL850 Management of Information Technology
information and control systems. Project systems management
3 Credits (3-0-0)
performance indices. Software Packages application for Project
Systems Management. Case studies. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module I: The Strategic Framework for IT Management. Emerging
MSL846 Total productivity Management information technologies: IT for competitive advantage; IT for internal
3 Credits (3-0-0) effectiveness; IT for inter- organizational linkage;Module II Strategy
Development and Planning Techniques.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module II: IT Planning (CSFs, Scenario analysis, Linkage analysis,
Module I: Total Productivity overview; meaning, relevance and scope
Enterprise modeling); Strategy formulation techniques; Nolan’s stage model
for productivity and effectiveness. Productivity conceptualisation.
and revised models for Nolan’s stages; IT investment decisions; methods
Productivity mission, objectives, policies and strategies. Productivity
for evaluating IT effectiveness; IT enabled business process redesign.
environment. Corporate culture, management styles, employees
participation, trade unions and role of governmental agencies. Module III: Strategic Issues Related to IT Management. Relating IT
Productivity measurement, monitoring and management both at to organizational leadership, culture, structure, policy and strategy;
micro and macro levels. Corporate and annual productivity plans. programmer productivity; Managing legacy systems; evaluating
centralization- issues; IT-forecasting.
Module II: Benchmarking: Management issues, modelling, tools and
techniques; indicators for evaluation of manufacturing, business or
MSL851 Strategic Alliance
services organizational performance and its measurement.
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Module III: Productivity Improvement Techniques: modifying
This is an advanced strategy course that focuses on the role of
organizational characteristics and work characteristics. Work study,
strategic alliances and inter-firm networks in the overall strategic
Value Engineering, Waste Management. Human resource development
adaptation process of the firm. Inter-firm networks and strategic
strategies to increase productivity. Managing technological change.
alliances have emerged as important strategic options for navigating
Interfaces of Productivity with Quality, Reliability and Safety.
survival and creating competitive advantage in times of high velocity
Management commitment and involvement for higher productivity.
turbulent environments characterized by pressures to master rapid
Case Studies.
technological developments, counteract new competitors and the
never ending need to acquire and master new capabilities (technical
MSL847 Advanced Methods for Management Research
and managerial). The course explores crucial success factors that
3 Credits (3-0-0)
distinguish successful from failing strategic alliances. The course
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 utilizes case discussions supplemented with readings, lectures, and
Introduction to management research, types of management conceptual discussions.
research, research designs, Portfolio of management research
methodologies involving qualitative and quantitative tools, MSL852 Network System: Applications and Management
optimization approaches, Multi-criteria decision making tools, case 3 Credits (3-0-0)
studies, interpretative models, soft system methodology, simulation,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
etc. Design of a questionnaire-based survey instrument, development
of data measurement, scale development, testing the validity and Module I: Networking fundamentals. Communication fundamentals
reliability of data, sampling techniques, descriptive statistical analysis, (transmission and transmission media; communication techniques;
inferential analysis, sampling techniques, sampling distribution, transmission efficiency) Wide area networks, local area networks,
hypothesis testing, ANOVA, factor analysis, correlation, regression ISDNs; OSI architecture, IBM’s SNA, Digitals DNA, Internetworking;
: OLS, Logic, Tobit, Probit, Discriminant analysis, Co-integration, network applications- EDI, Email, file transfer, conferencing,
unit root testing, Granger, causality, VAR, GARCH and its variants. Enterprise networking.
Structural equation modelling and other related research tools. Module II: Networking technologies and applications. Design
Portfolio of optimization tools such as linear programming, goal and development of enterprise network; Web-based application
programming, integer programming, Data Envelopment Analysis development, Design of large-scale intranets, Network and systems
251

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
management issues, Remote access to computer resources, Network MSL861 Market Research
and system security. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module III: Managing networks. Preparing for doing business on
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
the internet; Choosing and costing networks and network services;
Module I: Research concepts; exploratory, descriptive and conclusive
network management requirements; network performance indicators;
research. The market decision-making process and the need of
performance monitoring.
different types of research. Types of marketing problems and type
of marketing research activity. Sources of data; use and appraisal of
MSL853 Software project Management
existing information.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module II: Information from respondents, sampling design, scaling
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 techniques and questionnaire design, interviewing, mail surveys.
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: Information from experiment, experimental design for marketing,
IT Evolution and its implications for business, IT Productivity Motivational research, Advertising research, Analysis and reporting.
Paradox - Issues and Implications, Impact of IS in the Networked
Module III: Marketing information systems, Structure and design,
Economy, Reasons for success and failure of IT projects, Disaster
its role in planning and control; the place of marketing research.
planning, Approaches to IS Development (e.g. Portfolio approaches),
Technology Justification and Alignment Models, Strategic impact of MSL862 product Management
IT / IS, Role of the CIO and challenges in business continuity.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL854 Big Data Analytics & Data Science Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) Module I: The product in corporate life, Corporate and product
objective, product management role, responsibility, scope and functions,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
product strategy and policy, optimum product pattern/line range.
This course may expose the student to the following themes within
the discipline: Introduction to Data Science and Data Scientists, Module II: New product development and launching. Challenge
Introduction to Big Data, Theories in Data Science, Big data of change-opportunity and risk-product innovation, modification,
technologies, Large query data sets and associated theories, Exploring addition and elimination product proposals-sources, generation,
the Hadoop Ecosystem, Information management in Big Data and processing and selection. Establishing techno-economic feasibility
Emerging Issues. product testing and test marketing. Developing the strategy and
the plan. Implementing the plan, coordination and control. Brand
MSL855 Electronic Commerce identity, Image, Equity, Brand Plan and Management, New Product
Development Process. Brand and Product launch plan.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module III: Organization for Product Management, Marketing
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
manager-product manager-brand manager concept, approaches and
This course may expose the participants to the following organizational role, product manager-functions and tasks-tools and
topics: Introduction to e-commerce, B2B E-commerce models, techniques. Brand extensions, acquisitions, Brand value, Consumer
B2C E-Commerce models, Mercantile processes, E-Commerce insight. Strategies brand management.
Infrastructure and Capacity Planning, Web Portals & Services,
Trading, Pricing, Auctions, Bartering & Negotiations, Advanced and MSL863 Advertising and Sales promotion Management
emergent topics in E-Commerce, Inter-organization information
3 Credits (3-0-0)
systems, e-procurement systems, e-fulfillment systems, e-SCM, Risk
management in E-commerce. Hands on training may also be provided. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Module I: Mass communication theory and practices, marketing
MSL856 Business Intelligence and promotion mix- interrelationship and interdependence
3 Credits (3-0-0) advertising. Sales Promotion, Publicity and Public Relations- Scope,
Objectives, activities and creative role. Advertising, objectives
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 tasks and process, market segmentation and target audience-
The course will consist of the following: Introduction to data Message and copy development. Mass media, selection, planning,
mining, types of data mining systems, data preprocessing and budgeting and scheduling. Integrated programme and budget
data warehouses (OLAP/OLTP), Data Cube Computation and Data planning. Implementing the programme, coordination and control.
Generalization, Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations, Correlations, Advertising Agencies in India, their services and terms, advertisement
Classification, Prediction, Clustering, time series and sequence data campaign development, Agency selection and appointment; Agency
analysis, Graph Mining, Social Network Analysis, and Multirelational Organization and operation, Getting the best of the agency services.
Data Mining, Mining Object, Spatial, Multimedia, Text, and Web Data, Analysis of effectiveness of advertisement and promotional campaign.
Applications and trends.
Module II: Why and when sales promotion support, Sales promotion
activities; Consumer Oriented-Sales channel Oriented-Sales staff
MSL858 Business process Management with IT
oriented, Planning, budgeting, implementing and controlling
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) campaigns. Advertisement development brief.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 Module III: Valuation and measurement of advertising and sales
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: promotion effectiveness, Company organization for advertising: sales
Concepts of process and business process, Processes and workflow manager, Sales Promotion Manager, Market Development Manager-
management systems, Concepts and evolution of BPM technologies, Role of Tasks, advertising ethics, economics and social relevance. The
Impact of IT in BPM and its road map, BPM Cycle, Process deployment, Public Relations Activities, Public relations and mass media. Media
Process monitoring, Process optimization using IT tools, Flowcharting planning and budgeting control.
and business process mapping and emergent issues in BPM/BPR
technologies. Other relevant topics within the subject domain may MSL864 Corporate Communication
also be explored. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL859 Current and Emerging Issues in IT Management
Corporate communications is a strategic tool that is leveraged to
3 Credits (3-0-0)
gain strategic advantage. Organizations use it to lead, motivate,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 persuade and inform both employees and outside stakeholders.
(Relevant current and Emerging Issues) How organizations set objectives, define messages and reach their
252

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
employees, extended audiences, the media and customers, and how (negotiations, systems selling, targets setting, fact finding, training);
the company or group articulates its vision and brings its values to sales communications.
life, will all be discussed. Module III: Marketing Research for industrial product Marketing
The course will familiarize students with some of the issues that control (variance analysis audit). Industrial purchase behaviour and
specifically affect organisations and challenge the corporate processes, new product launch. Forecasting methods.
communications function. Some of these issues include a change in
CEO, mergers and acquisitions, imposition of government regulation MSL868 Digital Research Methods
and public pressure groups. Focus will be placed on crafting corporate
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
messages for internal and external stakeholders. Specific subject.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL865 Sales Management The course will have the following coverage: Internet as a research
medium; Research design; Sampling methods; Online surveys;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Nonreactive data collection; virtual ethnography; Online focus groups;
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 secondary qualitative data analysis; blogs & videos as source of data;
Module I: Organisational framework of the field sales force. Types data analysis approaches; tools.
and methods of field sales organisations-Career in Field Sales
Management. Field Sales Manager- coordinating and controlling MSL869 Current and Emerging Issues in Marketing
the Marketing mix, Tasks and responsibilities, team relations with
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Salesman and interaction and reporting relationship with Top
Management. Operating environment for Field Sales Managers. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Sales forecasting. (Relevant current and Emerging Issues)
Module II: Sales Information and Planning, The qualities and
role of a Field Sales Manager- Hierarchy of objectives and goals, MSL870 Corporate Governance
concept of sales strategies and tactics; types of Planning. Marketing 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Intelligence and Sales Management. Relationship and contribution
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
of Marketing Research to the sales development as decision making
process. Designing and planning of sales territories, procedure for The course would broadly be divided into three modules. Module 1
designing sales territories. Determining sales manpower requirements would provide a global perspective to the students on the concept of
to establish sales territories- Recruiting salesman- selection process corporate governance. Module 2 would focus on India and present
and system. Distribution and chamel selection & Management. the framework of corporate governance for Indian organizations.
Module 3 would focus on corporate social responsibility (CSR) and
Module III: Operational Management, Staffing: Its advantages,
its manifestations. Apart from the regular lectures and assignments,
responsibility for staffing, tools and methods of selection. Sales
there would be a course pack provided to the students containing
training: Its objectives, programme content, Methods of training,
international and national reports, articles, studies and cases
concepts of territorial management for field sales force. Measurement
to help them build an international perspective through the
and control: General considerations governing evaluation and sales
self-study component.
performance and control. Sales audit, Sales budgeting, Key account
management, Route Planning and control. Sales Promotion Customer
relationship management. MSL871 Banking and Financial Services
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
MSL866 International Marketing Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
3 Credits (3-0-0) The course will comprise of two broad sections; banking and financial
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 services. Banking portion will cover banking sector reforms, bank
management, financial statements of banks, sources and uses of bank
Module I: International marketing-its scope and tasks- world
funds, credit monitoring and management by banks, bank capital
economy prospects and Challenges; India’s external trade. Analysis
and Basel norms. Financial services will encompass both fund based
of export performance. Why all organisations cannot go global
and fee based services that are an integral part of modern financial
Shipping terms and international trade terms. Information needs
systems; it will include lease financing, hire purchase financing,
of exports. Costing and pricing in international trade. Advantages
consumer credit, factoring, housing finance, investment banking,
and disadvantages of globalisation.
credit rating, stock broking, depository and custodial services. The
Module II: Strategic export planning. Handling an export transaction. course work will encompass problem solving on relevant topics
Export marketing Checklist; Selection of Markets: Choosing Markets; and inputs from real life cases to give a practical insight to the
Export pricing; Management of export logistics. Documentation for theoretical concepts.
export; processing of an export trade. Sales forcasting in international
trade, Identifying geographical territories for expansion. Cultural
MSL872 Working Capital Management
factors affecting business in global market.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module III: Export credit system preshipment and post-shipment,
finance, medium and long term credit financing; ECGC; Transportation Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
and shipment of cargo; Marine insurance of cargo; procedure for Module I: Nature and Financial of Working Capital. Nature of Working
claiming rebate of excise duty. Import replenishment licensing Capita, Trade-off between Profitability and Risk, Determinants of
procedures. Generalized scheme of preferences. Sourcing and Working Capital. Factoring as a Sources Finance. Forecasting Working
Transfer pricing mechanism. WTO related issues and IPR related Capital requirements. Sources of financing Working Capital. Factoring
issues impacting global trade. as a source of finance. Bank credit and working capital Finance.
Approaches to determine Financing Mix. Working Capital Leverage.
MSL867 Industrial Marketing Management Cases and Practical Problems.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Module II: Current Assets Management. Cash Management,
Inventory Management, Receivables Management. Cases and Practical
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Problems.
Module I: Industrial marketing and Environment. Application of Module III: Analysis aTools and New Development. Operating
industrial buyer behaviour theories. Marketing plan to implement Cycle, Ratio Analysis, Funds-flow Analysis and Cash-Flow Statement
the marketing concept. as tools of Working Capital Management. Recent changes and new
Module II: The new product development process. Personal selling developments. Practical Problems.
253

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
MSL873 Security Analysis & portfolio Management Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
3 Credits (3-0-0) This course may expose the participants to the following topics:
Introduction to E-Governance, E-Governance models and frameworks,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
E-Governance infrastructure and stages in evolution, Information
Module I: Investment Environment. Saving and Financial flows, Management in Electronic Governance. Issues in Emerging and
Financial Intermediation, Investment in Corporate Securities and other Developing Economies, Selective Case Studies in E-Governance,
Investment Outlets, New Issue market and Secondary Markets. Sources Emerging initiatives in electronic governance, Role of policy. Other
of investment information. Theoretical framework for investment relevant topics within the subject domain may also be explored.
Decision. Regulatory Framework of Securities Markets in India.
Module II: Valuation of Securities. Valuation of Variable Income MSL878 Electronic payments
Securities (Equity Shares): Theory of Valuation-Earnings and Dividend
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Model. Fundamental Analysis, Aggregate Economic Analysis, Industry
Analysis, Company Analysis, Technical Analysis, Growth Shares, Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Under and Overvalued Shares. Analysis of Fixed Income Securities This course may expose the participants to the following topics:
like Preference Shares, Debentures/Bonds and other Financial Different business models in electronic payments, Digital certificates
Instruments. Interest Rate structure and yield to Maturity Curve. and certificate chains, Automated clearing and settlement systems,
Convertible Bonds: Warrants and Options. Banking systems and foreign exchanges, Other players in the
Module III: Portfolio Management. General principles. Measures ecosystem, E-Payment and Card security, Micro-payments, P2P
of Risk and Return, Required Rate of Return and CAPM, Markkowitz Payments, Electronic Cash, Challenges and role of policy. Other
Portfolio Theory. Efficient Capital Market Theory. Alternative Efficient relevant topics within the subject domain may also be explored.
Market Hypotheses. Constructing the Optimum Portfolio.
MSL879 Current and Emerging Issues in Finance
MSL874 Indian Financial System 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 (Relevant current and Emerging Issues)
This course is an introduction to the Indian financial system and tends
to appraise students with its components, functions and integration MSL880 Selected Topics in Management Methodology
of its sub components with each other. It covers different types of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
financial institutions, financial markets and financial instruments
and services through which the financial system operates. Also, the Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
students would develop an understanding of the role played by the
different financial intermediaries in developing a robust financial MSL881 Management of public Sector Enterprises in India
environment for any country. The course will also give insight into
3 Credits (3-0-0)
the role played by financial market regulators and the challenges
being faced by them in the modern internationally integrated Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
economies. This course will expose the participants to the following topics:
Concepts of cloud computing and its impact, Technology Road Map
MSL875 International Financial Management to Cloud Computing, Virtualization, Practical usage of virtualization,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Cloud Computing Frameworks and Deployment models. Cloud
resource utilization and optimization, Cloud and Web Services, Service
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Model Architectures, SLA and QoS, Service Oriented Architecture and
Module I: Foreign Exchange Market and Risk Management : Cloud Computing.
Environment of International Financial Management: Balance of
Payments. Means of International Payments, Foreign Exchange
MSL882 Enterprise Cloud Computing
Market, Currency Futures and Options Markets, Foreign Exchange
Risk Management, Political Risk, Interest Rate Risk. 1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Module II: Financing of International Operations : Determination Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
of Exchange Rate, Exchange Market and Arbitrage, Exchange This course will expose the participants to the following topics:
Rate Control, Financing of Exports and International Investments, Concepts of cloud computing and its impact, Technology Road Map
International Monetary Systems, European Monetary System, to Cloud Computing, Virtualization, Practical usage of virtualization,
International monetary and Financial Institutions. Cloud Computing Frameworks and Deployment models. Cloud
Module III: Financial Management of MNCs : Capital Budgeting resource utilization and optimization, Cloud and Web Services, Service
Decisions for Multinational Corporation, Financing Decisions- Cost Model Architectures, SLA and QoS, Service Oriented Architecture and
of Capital and Financial Structure, Working Capital Management and Cloud Computing.
Control, International Banking, International Transfer Pricing.
MSL883 ICTs, Development and Business
MSL876 Economics of Digital Business 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 The course will cover the following topics: Introduction, Development
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: agendas and place of ICTs, ICTs as appropriate technologies, ICTs in
Impact of diffusion of ICTs in Business and People,Trade-offs & education, health, industry & enterprises; ICT policy & regulations.
Network effects, Economics of Data communication including pricing, Politics of open technology standards; ICT consulting for government;
Firms, Networks, Centralization, Decentralization in 2 sided markets, ICTs, Bottom of Pyramid & Business.
Factors affecting organizational structure and size, Dynamics of
Open Source and Open Innovation, Information, Search, Switching MSL884 Information System Strategy
and Price dispersion, Information goods pricing and bundling. Other
3 Credits (3-0-0)
similar themes may also be explored.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL877 Electronic Government This course may expose the participants to the following topics:
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) IT Evolution and its implications for business, IT Productivity
254

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Management Studies
Paradox - Issues and Implications, Impact of IS in the Networked The course introduces forwards, futures, swaps, and options – how
Economy, Reasons for success and failure of IT projects, Disaster these markets function, how these securities are priced, and purposes
planning, Approaches to IS Development (e.g. Portfolio approaches), for which they are used by hedgers and sp0eculators. It covers basic
Technology Justification and Alignment Models, Strategic impact of concepts in stochastic calculus, numerical procedures (including
IT / IS, Role of the CIO and challenges in business continuity. binomial trees, Monte Carlo simulation, and finite difference methods),
value at risk measures, credit risk derivatives (valuation and usage),
MSL885 Digital Marketing-Analytics & Optimization martingales pricing theory, interest rate derivatives (such as bond
options, caps and floors), equilibrium and no-arbitrage models of the
3 Credits (3-0-0)
short-term interest rate, and advanced models (Heath, Jarrow, and
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 Morton model, and LIBOR market model), and real options.
The course may cover the following topics: Introduction and
Perspectives in internet marketing, Online consumer behaviour and MSL891 Data Analytics using Sp S S
technology adoption theories, Managing the Word of Web, Mapping
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
online communities & networks, Online pricing mechanisms, Social
Network Analytics & Optimization, Web Analytics and Optimization, Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Traffic analytics, Online campaign and channel management,
Managing the Web 2.0, Search Engine & Social Media Optimization, MSL892 predictive Analytics
SMAC, Social CRMs, Metrics for E-Commerce Analytics, KPIs,
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Revenue Analytics.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL886 IT Consulting & practice This course may expose the participants to the following topics:
3 Credits (3-0-0) Introduction to the different predictive analytics models, using
Predictive Analytics in decision making, types of Predictive Modeling,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Agent Modeling, Case Based Reasoning and Predictive Expert Systems.
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: Trends Text mining, Social Network Analytics, Heuristics, Swarm algorithms,
in the IT consulting industry, IT consulting issues and pain points, Hybrid Methods and algorithms. Other relevant topics within the
Critical IT issues and their organizational contexts, Marketing and subject domain may also be explored.
selling IT consulting projects, Project Entry Strategies, Contracting,
Proposal Writing and making the sales pitch, Frameworks for
MSL895 Advance Data Analysis for Management
technology evaluation. Frameworks for consulting intervention,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
change management and project closure,Implementation Planning for
IT Projects, Managing Consulting Firms and Knowledge Management. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Other relevant topics may also be explored. Module I: Descriptive vs. Inferential Analysis, Parametric vs.
Nanoparametric Analysis, Univariate, Bivariate and multivariate
MSL887 Mobile Commerce analysis, Hypothesis Testing and Estimation
3 Credits (3-0-0) Module II: ANCOVA, MANOVA, Logit Regression, Tobbit Regression,
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302 Panel Regression.
This course may expose the participants to the following topics: Module III: Factor Analysis, Cluster Analysis, Discriminant Analysis,
Introduction to Ubiquitous computing, Mobile communication and Data Envelopment Analysis, Structural Equation Modelling.
emerging technologies, Ubiquitous business models and challenges,
Security issues and information risk management in mobile commerce. MSL896 International Economic policy
Mobile services and location based services, Interface with Social Media
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and Cloud, Mobile banking and payment systems, Socio-economic
development with m-Commerce, Mobile based services for e-governance. Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
Introduction to mobile apps in the context of ICT ecosystem; explaining World trade; The standard trade model; economies of scale and
success of apps; app entrepreneurship; app economy, challenges of international trade; international factor movements; instruments of
entrepreneurship and economy. Business models of app stores; mobile trade policy; exchange rates and foreign exchange markets; money,
gaming; app customer segmentation; case studies. interest rates and exchange rates; price, output and exchange rates,
different exchange rate regimes and policy, optimum currency area;
MSL888 Data Warehousing for Business Decisions Global capital markets; Financial crisis and contagion, Transition
economies: crisis and reform.
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
MSL897 Consultancy process and Skills
This course may expose the participants to the following topics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
within this domain: Introduction to Database Management Systems,
Hierarchical modelling, Multi-dimensional modeling of data, Design Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
techniques and ETL, SQL. Data warehousing requirements for ETL; Data Module I: Introduction to Consultancy-its evolution, growth & status,
Warehousing Risks, OLAP and OLTP Management Issues, designing and Types of Consulting Services, firms and role of consultants, client-
supporting applications, Expanding a data warehouse. Other relevant consultant relationship. Marketing of Consultancy Services.
topics within the subject domain may also be explored.
Module II: The Consulting Process-Entry, Diagnosis, Action Planning,
Implementation and Termination/Closing;
MSL889 Current and Emerging Issues in public Sector
Module III: Methods of selection of consultants, Costs and fee
management
calculation, Preparation of Consultancy proposals and Agreements,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Technical Report Writing and Presentation.
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
(Relevant current and Emerging Issues) MSL898 Consultancy professional practice
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MSL890 Financial Engineering
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Module I: Negotiation Skills, Professional Ethics and Code of
Pre-requisite(s): MSL708 for MBA, MSL302 for B. Tech students Conduct. Managing a Consultancy firm-fundamentals of consulting
255

Management Studies Courses of Study 2024-2025
firm management, consulting firms and IT in consulting firms, The students would undertake corporate training in the industry. This
management of consulting assignments. course would evaluate the projects and experiences of the interns of
Module II: Consulting in various areas of Management-Consulting the full time MBA programme. A report would need to be submitted
in general and strategic management, consulting in financial in the prescribed format with due feedback from the company where
management, consulting in marketing and distribution management, the work was undertaken. Scope, achievement of objectives and
consulting in production and operation management, consulting in quality of deliverable would be evaluated.
HRM, consulting in IT.
Module III: R&D-Consultancy relation-ship, Careers and
MSC894 Seminar
Compensation in Consulting, Training and development of Consultants,
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Future Challenges and Opportunities in Consultancy.
Research of the industry in which they are currently working/related.
MSL899 Current and Emerging Issues in Consultancy
Management
MST894 Social Sector Attachment
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MSL301 & MSL302
The student shall spend a minimum of 28 hours with a non-profit
Relevant current and Emerging Issues – Open Slot – Content will be organization. The organization should be registered with government.
decided by faculty. The student proposes nature of work to be carried out and get in
approved by the organization. Each student is given a faculty mentor
MST893 Corporate Sector Attachment for effective execution of the proposed work. After the engagement
2 Credits (0-0-4) period, both the organization and the faculty certifies the work.
256

Department of Materials Science and Engineering
MLL100 Introduction to Materials Science and MLL104 Characterization of Materials-I
Engineering 4.5 Credits (3-0-3)
4 Credits (3-0-2) Overlaps with: MLL701, CLL736, CML729, PYL707
Structure of Solids: atomic and inter-atomic bonding, crystal structure Studies by optical microscope: Image formation, resolving power,
and imperfection in solids. Properties of Materials: Mechanical, numerical aperture, empty magnification, depth of focus, components
chemical, electrical and magnetic properties of metals, ceramics and of microscopes, important lens defects and their correction, bright
polymers. Processing of Materials: Thermodynamics basics, Phase field and dark field images, principles of phase contrast, interference
diagrams and phase transformation of metallic systems, fabrication and polarized light microscopy, image processing and sample
and processing of metals, polymers and ceramics. Performance of preparation techniques.
materials: Creep, fatigue, failure and corrosion of metals, ceramics
X Ray diffraction and their applications: Production and
(including cement and concrete), polymers, and composites (including
properties of X-ray, absorption of Xrays and filters, X-ray - diffraction
fiber reinforced structure, sandwich panels, and wood). Selection of
directions, diffraction methods. X-ray diffraction intensities, factors
Material: selection of materials for various applications, materials
affecting intensity, ‘structure factor’ calculations for simple, body
selection charges, CSE software, Example case studies such as
centered, and face centered, diamond cubic and hexagonal crystal
materials for large astronomical telescopes, springs, flywheels, safe
structures. Working principles of diffractometer, counters and cameras.
pressure vessels and reactors. Laboratory: The behavior of different
Indexing of XRD patterns. Precise lattice parameter determination,
type of materials (e.g. metals, ceramics, composites, polymers) will
compositional analysis by X-ray diffraction, determination of particle
be studied through carefully designed experiments. The fundamentals
size and micro/macro strains, polymer crystallinity.
of structure and properties of various materials will be communicated
through hands on experiments and model demonstration. Scanning electron microscope: Interaction of electrons with
matter, modes of operation, sample preparation, image formation
of plane and fractured surfaces, morphological and compositional
MLL102 Structure of Materials
analysis.
3 Credits (2-1-0)
Spectroscopic Techniques: Fundamentals of spectroscopic analysis
Overlaps with: MLL701 using FT-IR, UV-Visible and X-ray Photon Spectroscopy.
Structure at different length scales, correlation between structure Thermal Analysis Techniques: Fundamental basis of DSC/DTA/
and properties of materials (through examples), Atomic structure TGA and dilatometry.
of solids: bonding. Bonding forces and energies, primary bonding
and secondary bonding, band structure. Crystal structure. Types of
MLL181 Materials and Sustainable Developments
solids (monocrystals, polycrystals, amorphous materials), generation
of orderly patterns by symmetry operations, concept of lattice, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
concept of unit cell, Bravais lattices, crystal systems, point groups, Overview of Sustainability, Design for Sustainability, Sustainable
space groups, Pearson and Strukturbericht notations, crystallographic Technology Development, Life Cycle Assessment, Materials
positions, planes and directions, atomic hard sphere models, close Extraction and Resource Implications, Environmental Impacts
packing, voids, allotropy and polymorphism, crystal structure During Processing,Waste Management and Materials Recycling,
determination. Defects in solids: point defects, dislocations, interfaces, Green Chemistry, Environmental Protection, Environmentally Friendly
and volume defects. Introduction to microstructures. Theory of Materials, Materials for Green and Renewable Energy, Renewable
alloying: substitutional solid solutions, Hume-Rothery rules, interstitial Energy Policy, Environmental Justice, legislation, Various Policies for
solid solutions, ordering in solids. Sustainability, etc.
MLL103 Introduction to the Thermodynamics of MLL202 phase Equilibria and Transformation
Materials 3 Credits (2-1-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0) Pre-requisite(s): MLL103
Concept of state and equilibrium. Heat, work, temperature. System
Overlaps with: MLL713
and surrounding. Extensive and Intensive properties. Zeroth law.
Ideal gas, reversible and irreversible processes. Adiabatic process. Equilibrium, Phase rule, Single and multicomponent system: Gibbs
First law of thermodynamics and internal energy. Constant pressure Free energy as a function of temperature, ideal solutions, chemical
process and enthalpy. Applications of the first law. Specific heat at potential, regular solutions, activity; Equilibrium in heterogeneous
constant temperature and pressure. Thermochemistry. systems: Binary phase diagrams, systems with miscibility gap, ordered
alloys, the effect of temperature on solid solubility, the kinetics of
Second law of thermodynamics: Kelvin-Planck and Clausisus
phase transformations; TTT diagram of steel, shape memory diagram,
statements and their equivalence. Entropy. Carnot cycle. Combined
phase diagram of ceramic system (Al2O3-SiO2) and MgO-Al2O3.
statement of first and second laws. Statistical interpretation of entropy,
Ternary phase diagram, Diffusion: Atomistic mechanism, interstitial
entropy and disorder. Microstate and macrostate. Configurational and
diffusions, steady state and non-steady state (Fick’s Law), spinodal
thermal entropy.
decomposition, crystal interfaces and microstructure, interfacial
Auxiliary functions: Helmholtz free energy, Gibbs free energy, energy, solid/vapor interfaces; Solidification: nucleation and growth
Chemical potential. Various thermodynamic partial derivatives and in pure metals.
their relations. Maxwell’s relations, Gibbs-Helmholtz equations. Third
law of thermodynamics.
MLL203 Characterization of Materials-II
phase equilibria in one-component systems: variation of Gibbs
3 Credits (3-0-0)
free energy with temperature and pressure, Clausius-Clapeyron
equation, P-T diagram. Pre-requisite(s): MLL104
Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM): Working principle of
Thermodynamics of solutions: Raoult’s and Henry’s Law, activity
TEM. Image formation, resolving power, magnification, depth of focus,
of a component. Ideal solution. Gibbs-Duhem equation and its
important lens defects and their correction. Selected area diffraction
application.
patterns, reciprocal lattice and Ewald sphere construction, sample
Non-ideal solutions: Regular solutions. Sievert’s Law, activity
preparation, compositional analysis. Electron energy loss spectroscopy
and alternative standard states, dilute solutions and interaction
(EELS) in TEM.
parameters. Equilibrium constant, Reaction equilibria for (a)
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES): Principle of AES. The
homogeneous reactions consisting of gas mixtures, (b) heterogeneous
mechanism of the Auger process. Source of electrons.
reactions consisting of condensed phases and gas mixtures, Ellingham
Diagram. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XpS): Physical basis of XPS
257

Materials Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
method and the experimental technique. Basic laws of XPS spectra. And Interaction With Other Dislocations. Strengthening Mechanisms.
X-Ray semi-quantitative analysis. Practical application of the method Fracture And Fatigue; Fracture And Fatigue Mechanisms; Linear Elastic
XPS, Comparative characteristics of AES and XPS. Fracture Mechanics, Griffiths Criteria, Fracture Toughness; Fatigue
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS): Secondary ion Testing, Fatigue Crack Propagation, Creep And Creep Mechanisms,
emission. Qualitative and quantitative analysis, Bulk doping, Practical Correlation Between Properties And Performance, Deformation
application of SIMS. Mechanism Maps.
MLL253 Electronic, Optical and Magnetic properties
MLL212 Mathematical Methods in Materials Engineering
of Materials
3 Credits (2-1-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL101
Pre-requisite(s): PYL100
Vector Calculus: Gradient, Divergence and Curl, Physical
interpretation, Laplacian. Overlaps with: PYL102, PYL703, CML102
Calculus of variations: Euler equations, Lagrangian multipliers, Electronic properties: Classical conductivity, Quantum description
Variations with constraints. of conductivity, Effect of alloying in metals, Intrinsic & extrinsic
semiconductor properties, Application of Fermi-Dirac statistics,
Tensor analysis: Contraction, Quotient rule, Pseudotensors, Dual
Fermi level & Hall effect, Two probe and four probe measurements,
tensors, Tensor properties of crystals: Equilibrium and transport
Conductive polymers, Ionic conductors, Superconductors, Device
properties.
applications (Diode, Ohmic/Schottky junctions etc.).
Group theory: Applications to crystal symmetry and point groups,
Dielectric properties: Dielectric constant, Maxwell’s equations,
Representation theory, Character tables.
Complex dielectric constant, frequency dependence, Non-linear
Fourier Analysis: Fourier Series, Approximation by Trigonometric dielectrics, Chemical synthesis routes.
Polynomials, Fourier Cosine and Sine Transforms, Fourier Transform.
Optical properties: Beer-Lambert’s law, Transmittance, reflectivity
Discrete and Fast Fourier Transforms.
& conductivity, Classical & quantum approach to optical properties,
Partial Differential Equations (PDEs): Basic Concepts of PDEs, Phonons, Spectroscopy, luminescence, fluorescence, Optical devices
solution by separating Variables, Heat equation and application to (LASERs, LEDs).
heat Flow from a body in Space, Solution by Fourier Series, Steady
Magnetic properties: Types of magnetism (Ferro-, para-, ferri-, dia-
Two-Dimensional Heat Problems.
and antiferro-), Susceptibility, Curie temperature, Neel’s temperature,
Domain structure and magnet design; Synthesis of magnetic and
MLL213 Materials Modelling
superconducting materials.
3 Credits (1-0-4)
Pre-requisite(s): COL100, MTL107 MLL262 principles of Metal Extraction
Data analysis and data acquisition, Finite element difference and 4 Credits (3-1-0)
finite element methods, Applications to structure, thermodynamics
Pre-requisite(s): CLL110, MLL103
and phase transformations.
Materials and heat balance, Application of Thermodynamics, Mineral
Monte-carlo simulations and integration: Random walk model,
beneficiation processes. Iron making. Steel making. Al production.
Metropolis algorithm,, Examples of the Monte Carlo Method in
Hydrometallurgy.
Materials Science.
Molecular Dynamics: State Variables or Dependent Variables,
MLL264 Glass and Ceramics
Equations of State, Models of Interatomic Potentials, Equations of
Motion and integration of the Equations of Motion, Linear and Non- 2 Credits (2-0-0)
linear regression, Introduction to Machine learning. Pre-requisite(s): APL102
part-1: Glass
MLL242 Introduction to polymeric Materials
Definition of glass, principles of glass formation (Zachariasen’s rule),
4 Credits (3-0-2) determination of glass forming ability and stability, glass melting, raw
Pre-requisite(s): CML100 materials, compositional nomenclature, batch calculation, immiscibility
of glass forming system, structure of glasses, network connectivity,
Overlaps with: TXL110
dimensionality, bond angle distribution, viscosity of glass forming
Different classes of polymers and their nomenclature, molecular melts, polymer and metallic glass, density and thermal expansion,
weights, their significance and methods for their determination; glass ceramics.
glass transition temperature, crystallinity, and morphology;
part-2 Ceramics
condensation and addition polymerization, kinetics and reactivity
ratios; polymerization methods-bulk, solution, suspension and Ceramics synthesis : Solid State reaction, coprecipitation, sol-gel,
emulsion, inorganic polymers, surface functionalization, additives precursor, microemulsion, solvothermal/hydrothermal, ion –exchange,
and reinforcements for polymers, concept of blends, alloys and mechano-chemical synthesis; science of colloidal processing, powder
composites, general polymer processing techniques, commodity consolidation and forming of ceramics, sintering, refractory material
plastics and engineering polymers, recycling and reuse. (case studies: alumino silicate, spinel, ZrO2, Si3N4, SIALON etc.),
white wares, surface and coating.
MLL251 Mechanical Behavior of Materials
4 Credits (3-1-0) MLS302 Research practice for Beginners
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): APL102
problem formulation: which topic or field is being examined and
Overlaps with: MLL711
what are its component issues?
Elasticity: Elastic Constants And Atomistic Origin; State Of Stress,
Literature search: finding materials relevant to the subject being
Mohr Circle; Stress And Strain Tensor, Isotropic Versus Non-isotropic
explored.
Materials; Non-liner Elasticity (Eg., Polymers) And Viscoelasticity.
Plasticity: Yield Criteria & Work Hardening, Stress-strain Curve; Single Data evaluation: determining which literature makes a significant
Crystal Slip & Twins; Theoretical Shear Strength. Defects In Solids; contribution to the understanding of the topic.
Dislocations: Burgers Vectors, Slip Systems; Dislocation Motion: Stress Analysis and interpretation: discussing the findings and
Field Of Dislocation; Forces On Dislocations, Dislocation Multiplication conclusions of pertinent literature.
258

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Materials Science and Engineering
MLL341 Engineering Biomaterials and steel making in India, overview of blast furnace iron making
2 Credits (2-0-0) and modern steel making, sponge iron making, smelting reduction
processes, general physiochemical fundamentals, present status of
Pre-requisite(s): MLL242 world steel industry, general layout of integrated steel plants, raw
Definition of biomaterials (history & background), Classification materials for steel making, steel making refractories.
of biomaterials (based on response, materials & applications),
Classification of furnaces; different kinds of furnaces; heat
Biocompatible materials, Biocompatibility, Cytotoxicity and Testing balance, energy conservation and energy audit; parts, construction
(In vitro/ In vivo), Structure-property correlation, Processing of and design aspects of blast furnace, ancillary equipment; blast furnace
biocompatible materials including various fabrication techniques. instrumentation; Blast furnace reactions; Gruner’s theorem, carbon
deposition, the partitioning of solute elements between the Iron and
MLp352 Mechanical Behavior of Materials Laboratory
the slag; reactions in blast furnace; blast furnace slags; mass balance
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) and heat balance.
Pre-requisite(s): MLL251 Blast furnace (B/F) operations: B/F irregularities and remedial
Tensile/compression/Flexural testing, Viscoelasticity, Strain measures, B/F refractories and causes of failure, modern trends in
Ageing and Yield Point Phenomenon, Hardness testing, Impact (B/F) technology overview of direct reduction processes, electric
testing, Fatigue testing, Creep testing, Effect of temperature on smelting; production of DRI (HBI/Sponge iron).
mechanical properties, Dislocation observation by etch pit technique, Alternate Iron Making processes: Sponge iron making -coal
Strengthening mechanism demonstration (grain size or work -based and gas -based, smelting reduction processes-fundamentals,
hardening or precipitation strengthening), Plastic anisotropy, Dynamic catagorisation, salient features of Corex, Hismelt, Finex, Fastmet,
mechanical behaviour. ITmk3 processes, Mini-blast furnace.
Review of traditional steel making; physical chemistry and
MLL342 physical Chemistry of polymers
thermodynamics; air/O2 impurity interaction, slag metal interaction,
3 Credits (3-0-0) role of slags in refining, continuous casting; foaming slag; removal
Pre-requisite(s): MLL242 of S and P; de-oxidizers, alloying; Open hearth F/C and operation;
Bessemer converters; bottom blown and top blown processes; slag
The course content includes polymer molecules, their conformations,
practices and sequencing; LD, VD, AOD, and VOD; Ladle metallurgy;
crystalline and two phase structures and their effects on various
electric arc furnace and DRI usage; energy, environmental and quality
thermo- physical properties such as melting, glass transition and
considerations.
crystallization kinetics.
MLp362 Metallography Lab
MLL343 polymer and Elastomer Technology
2 Credits (0-0-4)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262
Pre-requisite(s): MLL242
Sample preparation procedure for metallographic observation:
Commodity plastics; additives for plastics; industrial process to
Sample machining and mounting, Mechanical polishing, chemical
manufacture, properties and applications of major thermoplastic and
polishing, electrolytic polishing, Etchants selection and Etching
thermosetts. Natural and synthetic elastomers, additives for rubbers,
procedure (macro etching, electrolytic etching, chemical etching);
compounding and vulcanization.
Study of metallurgical microscope.
MLL344 Rheology and processing of polymers Microstructure observation in optical microscope: Microstructure
of various ferrous (for example: cast iron, iron, carbon steels, stainless
4 Credits (3-0-2)
steels, over heated and banded structures etc.,) and non-ferrous (Cu-,
Pre-requisite(s): MLL242 Al-, Pb-, Mg-, Ti-and Ni-alloys) metal grades.
Course covers Newtonian and non-Newtonian flow, simple shear flow,
Microstructure interpretation and analysis: Grain size
elongational flow, viscoelasticity, Rheometers, molecular models,
measurements (line-intercept-, ASTM grain size-, digital images
classification of polymer processing operations , extrusion, molding
based-methods), particle or precipitate size, fraction and distribution
based processes, compounding and mixing, thermoforming and other
analysis. In situ metallography practice.
processing methods.
MLL363 Metal Casting Technology
MLL345 polymer Matrix Composites
3 Credits (2-0-2)
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262
Pre-requisite(s): MLL242
Overlaps with: MCL780
Overlaps with: MLL729
Introduction to casting and foundry industry; basic principles of
The course will cover definition and classification of composites,
casting processes; sequence in foundry operations; patterns;
miscibility, nature of interface, nature of polymer matrices,
moulding practice; ingredients of moulding sand and core sand, sand
reinforcements, basic theoretical models to predict mechanical testing; different moulding processes.
properties and the role of distribution, dispersion etc. on the
Types of furnaces used in foundry; furnaces for melting; melting
performance properties of polymer based composites.
practice for steel, cast iron, aluminium alloys, copper alloys and
MLp354 Functional Materials Laboratory magnesium alloys; safety considerations; fluxing, degassing
and inoculation.
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
Sand casting, permanent mould casting, die casting, centrifugal
Pre-requisite(s): MLL253 casting, plaster mould casting, investment casting, continuous casting,
This course is an extension of MLL211. It is expected that enrolled squeeze casting, full mould process, strip casting.
students would have successfully completed the credits of this course.
Overview of pouring and solidification, concept of shrinkage,
The prior knowledge of content of this course would be mandatory.
Chvorinov’s rule, chilling; gating systems, functions of riser, types of
riser, bottom pouring and top pouring , yield calculations, visualization
MLL361 Iron and Steel Making
of mould filling (modeling), methoding.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Concepts of solidification; directional solidification, role of chilling;
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262 filtration of liquid metals; consumables; details of inoculation and
Introduction to production of Iron and Steel: Early history of modification – with respect to cast irons and Al-Si system; casting
iron and steel, evolution of iron and steel making technology, iron defects; soundness of casting and its assessment.
259

Materials Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
MLL364 Welding Metallurgy Overlaps with: MCL131
3 Credits (2-0-2) Introduction to primary processing of materials: Solidification
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262 in metals (casting process and defects), powder processing for
Overlaps with: MCL135, MCL778 metals and ceramics (sintering techniques and compaction) and
Fundamentals: Fusion and Solid-State Welding, Energy Sources, Arc Moulding processes for polymers (Compounding and injection, blow
Characteristics, Metal Transfer, Physical Properties of Metals and and compression processes). Microstructure processing; Specific
Shielding Gases. Heat Flow in Welding, Quantitative Calculation of processing or case studies: Ironmaking, steelmaking; non-ferrous
Heat Transfer, HAZ width, Residual Stress and Distortion. metals; Thermoset and thermoplastic polymers; Alumina and Zirconia
processing.
ARC Welding processes: Power Sources, Principles of Operation,
Volt-Ampere Characteristics. Fusion Welding Processes: SMAW, GTAW, Introduction to secondary processing in materials: Machining
GMAW, FCAW, SAW, Stud AW: Fundamentals, Equipment, and filler and Mechanical working (Rolling, Forging, extrusion, sheet metal
metal classifications, Materials weldablility, Applications, Welding forming etc.,); Heat treatment; Joining (Soldering, Brazing, Adhesives,
Variables, Weld Quality, Process Variations; Other Welding Processes. Fasteners and Welding) processes.
Welding Metallurgy: Phase transformations- weld CCT diagrams - Introduction to surface finishing processes: Electrolytic-
carbon equivalent-preheating and post heating; Welding of steels - use polishing and plating, and spray coating (Plasma spray coating
of Schaffler and Delong diagrams, Cast irons & Non-ferrous alloys: processes), paint finish; surface hardening treatments.
Metallurgical Difficulties, Process selection, Filler metal selection, Introduction to Special processes: Thin-film and semiconductor
safe welding procedures. processing: PVD and CVD processes, single crystal growth (vapour
Tests, Qualifications and Safety: Overview of Weld Discontinuities, phase transport, Czochralski, Bridgman); Rapid prototyping processes
Weldability, Mechanical tests. WPS, PQR and WPQ. Safety in Welding. (additive manufacturing including typical 3D printing techniques like
extrusion melting, selective laser melting/sintering, e-beam melting
MLL365 powder Metallurgy and droplet ejection).
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MLL372 Materials Selection and Design
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MCL133
Introduction – Historical background, important steps in powder Pre-requisite(s): MLL251, MLL253
metallurgy (P/M) process – Advantage and Limitations and
Overlaps with: MLL712
Applications.
Historical evolution of engineering materials, evolution of materials
Methods – Production of ceramic powders, automation, rapid
in products, Engineering materials and their properties: families of
solidification technique. Characteristics: sampling – chemical
engineering materials, materials information for design, materials
composition, particle shape and size analysis, Surface area, packing
properties, Materials property chart: exploring materials properties,
and flow characteristics, Porosity and density, compressibility, Strength materials property charts e.g. the modulus- density chart, the
properties. Blending and mixing of metal powders; Compaction of strength-density chart, the fracture toughness-modulus chart, thermal
powders, pressure less and pressure compaction techniques, Hot conductivity-electrical resistivity chart, Materials selection-the basics:
temperature compaction – Uni-axial hot pressing, Hot extrusion, Spark the selection strategy, materials indices, the selection procedure,
sintering, Hot isostatic pressing, Injection moulding – Sintering: Types, Multiple constraints and conflicting objectives: selection with multiple
Theory, process variables, Effects, atmospheres, metallographic constraints, conflicting objectives, Selection of materials and shape:
technique for sintered products. shape factors, limits to shape efficiency, exploring the materials shape
Post sintering operations; Products: Porous parts, sintered carbides, combinations, materials indices that include shape, architectured
cermets, dispersion strengthened materials, electrical applications, materials, Processes and process selection: classification of processes:
sintered friction materials. shaping, joining and finishing, processing for properties, process
Atomization, Mechanical alloying, Metal Injection moulding, Microwave selection, ranking process cost, Designing hybrid materials: holes in
sintering and self propagating high temperature synthesis. materials property space, composites, sandwich structures, cellular
structures, segmented structures, case studies.
MLL366 Heat treatment and Surface Engineering
MLL452 Corrosion and Degradation of Materials
3 Credits (2-0-2)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MLL262
Overlaps with: MCL788 Pre-requisite(s): MLL371
Introduction to heat treatment procedure, different schemes; Introduction to corrosion and degradation of materials. Electrochemical
Influence of them on the metals/alloys microstructure; Microstructural thermodynamics and kinetics of corrosion. Passivity. Corrosion related
analysis. failures and types of corrosion (Uniform, Galvanic, Crevice corrosion,
Iron-carbon equilibrium diagram: Transformations on heating and Pitting, Intergranular, Dealloying, Erosion, Cavitation, Fretting,
cooling. Influence of alloying elements, TTT & CCT diagrams. General Corrosion cracking, Corrosion fatigue, and Microbiological corrosion).
principles for steels. Heat treatment equipment’s. Elevated temperature corrosion (oxidation, creep, thermal fatigue,
Heat treatment processes, hardenability studies, Jominy end metallurgical instabilities). Thermodynamics and kinetics of oxidation.
quench test, austempering and martempering. thermo mechanical Environmental degradation of engineering materials including glass,
treatments.Precipitation hardening. polymers, ceramics and composites. Corrosion prevention (cathodic
protection, coatings and inhibitors).
Surface modification technique, Heat treatment of specific alloys:
HSLA steels, high speed steels, maraging steels, tool steels and
MLp473 Materials Selection and Design Lab
die steels. heat treatment of gray irons, white irons (malleabilising)
and S.G.Irons. austempering of S.G.iron. heat treatment of various 1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
non-ferrous alloys. Pre-requisite(s): MLL372
Defects: Defects in heat treated parts, causes and remedy design
This course is an extension of MLL372. It is expected that enrolled
for heat treatment.
students would have successfully completed the credits of this course.
Softwares:Introduction to heat treatment softwares. The prior knowledge of content of this course would be mandatory.
MLL371 Materials processing MLL701 Structure and Characterization of Materials
3 Credits (2-0-2) 3 Credits (3–0–0)
Pre-requisite(s): MLL103, MLL202 Basic concept of crystallography, crystal structure, stereographic
260

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Materials Science and Engineering
projection, diffraction analysis of crystal structure: X-ray, neutron shape factors, limits to shape efficiency, exploring the materials shape
and electron diffraction, texture analysis, selected area diffraction in combinations, materials indices that include shape, architectured
electron microscope, micro-analysis in electron microscopy, scanning materials, Processes and process selection: classification of processes:
probe microscopy and related techniques, Chemical characterization shaping, joining and finishing, processing for properties, process
will include Rutherford back scattering, Auger, X-ray photoemission, selection, ranking process cost, Designing hybrid materials: holes in
Energy dispersive, Wavelength dispersive, and Raman spectroscopes. materials property space, composites, sandwich structures, cellular
Quantitative and tomographic analysis of microstructures (3D diffraction structures, segmented structures, case studies.
and imaging techniques). Mass spectrometry and NMR spectrometry.
MLL713 phase Transformations
MLL702 Thermodynamics of Materials
3 Credits (3–0–0)
3 Credits (3–0–0)
Introduction and classification of phase transformation. Diffusion in
Laws of thermodynamics: Thermodynamic systems and variables, Solid: Fick’s 1st and 2nd laws, The Kirkendall Effect, Darken’s analysis,
Zeroth, 1st, 2nd and 3rd laws. Combined statement for 1st and various diffusion mechanisms. Thermodynamics of Transformation:
2nd laws; Equilibrium in thermodynamic systems: Free energy and Free energy of solid solutions, order of transformation, driving
criteria for equilibrium; Statistical interpretation of entropy; Unary force for first order transformation with and without composition
heterogeneous systems: Phase equilibrium in one component system, change, Second Order transformation, Spinodal decomposition.
Chemical potential, Clausius-Clayperon equation, Unary phase Nucleation kinetics: Homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation,
diagram; Thermodynamics of solutions: Partial molar quantities, homogeneous nucleation with composition change, Heterogeneous
Fugacity and activity, The behavior of dilute solutions, ideal, non-ideal nucleation, Strain energy effects. Growth Kinetics: Diffusion-
and regular solutions; Binary heterogeneous systems: Gibbs phase controlled and Interface-controlled growth. Overall transformation
rule and binary phase diagrams, Free energy composition diagrams, kinetics, Johnson-Mehl-Avarami model. Particle coarsening. Recovery,
Common tangent construction, Phase equilibrium calculations; Recrystallization and Grain Growth. Diffusionless transformation:
Introduction to ternary phase diagrams; Thermodynamics of Martensitic transformation. Solidification.
electrochemical systems, cell reactions and EMF, Formation and
concentrations cells; Thermodynamics of interfaces: Surface tension MLL714 Fracture Mechanics
and surface energy, Surface excess properties, Effect of surfaces
3 Credits (3–0–0)
on phase diagrams; Equilibrium shape of a crystal: Gibbs-Wulff
Linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) and Elastic plastic fracture
construction; Adsorption: The Gibbs adsorption equation.
mechanics (EPFM). Theoretical cohesive strength. Energy based
MLL703 Mathematical and Computational Methods in approach to fracture. Griffiths crack theory. Energy release rate:
Materials compliance and strain energy approach. Critical energy release rate
and toughness. Stress field around a crack: Modes I, II and III. Plane
3 Credits (3–0–0)
strain and plane stress. Effect of plate thickness. Stress intensity
Review of linear algebra: Vectors, Matrices, Functions, Coordinate
factor. Critical stress intensity factor and fracture toughness. Plastic
transformation (linear and orthogonal), Eigen values and Eigen
deformation near the crack tip. Approximate plastic zone size based
vectors; Eigenvalue Problems: Matrix and diagonalization; Tensors and
on von-Mises and Tresca yield criteria. Irwin and Dugdale approaches.
its applications in materials science (elastic anisotropy etc.,); Vector
Effective crack size. J-Integral: definition and path independence.
Calculus for different geometries – Linear and planes, directional
Equivalence of J, G and K. Crack-tip opening displacement. Fracture
derivative, gradients and integral theorems; Partial Differentiation –
toughness testing. Ductile-brittle transition, impact energy fracture
properties and solution techniques; Integration: Single, multiple, line
toughness correlation. Cyclic stress and strain fatigue. Fatigue crack
and change of variables; Ordinary Differential Equations: Analytical
propagation, analysis of engineering failures. Microstructural aspects
and Numerical Solution methods of ODEs; Data Analysis: Probability
of fracture toughness. Environmental assisted cracking. Mixed mode
and statistics - Curve fitting; Computing Probability, smoothening
crack initiation and growth.
and reconciliation of data, concept and parameters of distribution,
regression analysis (linear and nonlinear), Error estimation and analysis,
MLL715 Advanced Engineering Materials
confidence intervals, hypothesis testing; Numerical Techniques: Roots
of equation, solution of Linear and Nonlinear systems of equations 3 Credits (3–0–0)
(Bisection, Newton raphson), Interpolation and extrapolation. Introduction to various engineering materials (high strength steels,
light metals and alloys (magnesium and its alloys, aluminum and its
MLp704 Materials processing and Characterization Lab alloys and titanium and its alloys etc.,), composites, smart materials,
4 Credits (1–1–4) porous materials etc.,) and their property profiles with their relation
to basic structure; structure and properties of steels: high- and ultra-
Materials processing routes: chemical synthesis, powder compaction,
high strength steels, TWIP steels, TRIP steels, Dualphase steels,
Heat treatment – annealing, quenching etc.; Light Microscopy:
Martensitic steels, Bainitic steels etc.; structure and properties of
polishing and microstructure; X-ray diffraction and texture;
light metals and alloys: Aluminum and its alloys (Al-Li, Al-Si, Al-Mg-
Mechanical, Electrical and Chemical characterization of materials;
Si etc.,), Magnesium and its alloys (Pure Mg and other conventional
Thermal analysis and Spectroscopy of materials; Electron microscopy
Mg alloys), Titanium and its alloys (pure Ti, α, α + β and β alloys,
(SEM, TEM etc.,); Micro- and nano- scale response of materials:
Transformation induced plasticity Ti alloys, etc.,); Introduction,
Instrumented microindenter, Nano-indentation response etc.; Atomic
structure and properties to composite materials (metal-matrix,
force microscopy; Wear and Fatigue in materials; Creep at nano and
particulate, laminated and fibre reinforced etc.,); structure and
bulk levels of materials; Dynamic characterization of materials.
properties of: hybrid materials, porous materials (metal foams, lattice
MLL712/ApL753 Materials Design and Selection materials etc.,), smart materials (shape memory alloys etc.,), auxetic
materials; Case studies of materials applications in automotive,
3 Credits (3–0–0)
aerospace, power generation sectors etc.
Historical evolution of engineering materials, evolution of materials
in products, Engineering materials and their properties: families of
MLL716/ApL767 Engineering Failure Analysis and
engineering materials, materials information for design, materials
prevention
properties, Materials property chart: exploring materials properties,
materials property charts e.g. the modulus- density chart, the 3 Credits (3–0–0)
strength-density chart, the fracture toughness-modulus chart, thermal Common causes of failure, principles of failure analysis, fracture
conductivity-electrical resistivity chart, Materials selection-the basics: mechanics approach to failure problems, techniques of failure analysis,
the selection strategy, materials indices, the selection procedure, service failure mechanisms, ductile and brittle fracture, fatigue failure,
Multiple constraints and conflicting objectives: selection with multiple wear failure, hydrogen induced failure, environment induced failures,
constraints, conflicting objectives, Selection of materials and shape: high temperature failure, faulty heat treatment and design failures,
261

Materials Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
processing failure (forging, casting, machining etc.), failure problems MLL724 polymer Engineering and Rheology
in joints and weldments, case studies for failure analysis of structural 3 Credits (3-0-0)
components and mechanical system.
Course covers Newtonian and non-Newtonian flow, simple shear flow
MLL717 Engineering and Speciality polymers and its significance, normal stresses, simple elongational flow and
its significance, viscoelasticity, Rheometers, molecular, theoratical
3 Credits (3–0–0)
and related models.
Introduction to engineering polymers, applications, processing,
thermoplastic engineering plastics, polycarbonates, polyimides, MLL725 polymer Testing and properties
polyphenylene oxide, liquid crystalline polymers, poly(ether ketone), 3 Credits (3-0-0)
thermosets, speciality polymers, hydrogels, conducting polymers,
Properties of polymers and their measurements by standard test
fluoropolymers.
methods; tensile, flexural and impact properties; hardness, abrasion
resistance and long-term fracture properties; softening point, heat
MLL718 polymeric Nanomaterials and Nanocomposites
distortion temperature, thermal expansion coefficient and thermal
3 Credits (3–0–0) conductivity; electrical insulation and conductivity. sorption, diffusion
Introduction to general aspects of nanostructured materials; and permeation of gases/liquids through polymer membranes;
Nanocomposites and block copolymers; Interaction parameter,phase standards used are BIS, BS, ASTM, ISO and DIM; correlation of test
behaviour, morphology; Phase diagrams, microphase separation with actual performance; statistical quality control in various tests.
transition; Polymer nanocomposites: Technical challenges;
Understanding of interfacial dynamics using LJ Potential and many MLp709 polymer Synthesis and Characterization
body problems approach; Nanoreinforcements eg. Nanoclay, POSS, Laboratory
Carbon nanostructures and nanoparticles; Dispersion and percolation; 2 Credits (0-0-4)
Influence of size, shape and diameter of nanotubes/nanofillers;
Experiments: identification of polymers; purification of monomers;
Functionalisation of nanoparticles and nanoplatelets.
suspension polymerization of styrene; emulsion polymerization of vinyl
acetate and butyl acrylate; bulk and solution polymerization of methyl
MLL719 polymer Chemistry
methacrylate; preparation and testing of epoxy resins; unsaturated
3 Credits (3-0-0) polyester resin technology; preparation of nylon 6 and nylon 10 by
Overlaps with: MLL242, TXL711 interfacial polymerization; copolymerization and determination of
reactivity ratios; epoxide equivalent; hydrogel synthesis; molecular
Introduction to polymers, nomenclature, addition, condensation, chain
weight determination by viscometry and end-group analysis; atom
growth and step growth polymerization, kinetics of polymerization,
transfer radical polymerization of styrene; thermal characterization
material classes, polymerization techniques: bulk, suspension
by DSC and TGA; GPC; FTIR and NMR.
and emulsion polymerization; cationic, anionic and free radical
polymerization; copolymerization, reactivity ratios; atom transfer MLp728 polymer Rheology and processing Lab
radical polymerization.
1 Credit (0-0-2)
MLL720 polymer processing The course comprises of eight regular experiments on various
3 Credits (3-0-0) processing equipments and two experiments dealing with rheology
of polymer melts.
Course covers the classification of polymer processing operations,
extrusion, molding based processes, compounding and mixing, MLL727 Smart polymeric Materials
thermoforming and other processing methods, FDM 3D Printing 3 Credits (3–0–0)
Process.
This course focuses on the syntheses, structures, behaviours of
polymers and polymeric materials that are responsive to external
MLL721 polymer physics
stimuli such as temperature, light, electric potential, pH, and ionic
3 Credits (3-0-0) strength. The course will contain important new material to understand
Polymer molecules, their conformations, crystalline and two phase and characterize molecular and submolecular assemblies that enable
structures and their effects on various thermo- physical properties the fabrication of switch-driven polymer systems. This introduces
such as melting, glass transition and crystallization kinetics. the concepts of stimuli-responsiveness, including the fundamental
materials properties required for the design. The module also gives
MLL722 polymer Technology an overview of the design, preparation and uses of polymers in the
3 Credits (3-0-0) area of smart surfaces, polymer brush, membranes, gated transport,
drug release, catalysis, etc. with a focus on the factors governing
Overlaps with: MLL343
their physical properties and their structure-property relationships.
Polymers of commercial importance; additives for plastics; stabilizers,
fillers, plasticizers and extenders, lubricants and flow promoters, MLL729 polymer Blends and Composites
flame retardants, blowing agents, colourants, cross-linking agents and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
biodegradation additives; manufacture, properties and applications
of major thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers: polyethylene, Pre-requisite(s): EC75
polypropylene, poly (vinylene chloride), polystyrene and other Course contents: The course will cover definition and classification
styrenics, phenol-formaldehyde, urea-melamine formaldehyde and of blends and composites. Thermodynamics and phase behaviour
unsaturated polyester resins. of polymer blends, compatibilization strategies, nature of polymer
matrices, reinforcements, basic theoretical models to predict
MLL723 polymer Characterization mechanical properties and the role of fibre length, distribution,
3 Credits (3-0-0) dispersion etc. on the performance properties of polymer-based
blends and composites.
Overlaps with: MLL104
Molecular weight and molecular dimensions by end-group MLL730 Diffusion and Kinetics
analysis, osmometry, light scattering, viscometry, gel permeation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
chromatography, mass spectrometry, FT-IR and NMR spectroscopic
Pre-requisite(s): MLL702 for PG, MLL103 for UG
techniques. Thermal properties by differential scanning calorimetry,
differential thermal analysis, thermogravimetry. Polarized light optical Introduction to solid state diffusion, atomistics of diffusion, Fick's first
microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and transmission electron and second laws; thin film solution and tracer diffusion measurements,
microscopy, X-ray diffraction on polymers; crystallinity by density semi-infinite and infinite diffusion couples - diffusion in a concentration
measurements. gradient; temperature effects; surface, grain boundary and dislocation
262

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Materials Science and Engineering
pipe diffusion; diffusion in ionic solids, interdiffusion and the behavior of various classes of materials. Design and selection of
Kirkendall effect, measurement of variable diffusion coefficients; materials for tribological applications. Surface modification techniques:
thermodynamics vs. Kinetics, elementary and non-elementary surface patterning, surface heat treatment, and surface coatings.
reactions, reaction order, activation energy, Arrhenius law, irreversible Surface and subsurface characterization techniques for tribological
and reversible reactions, degree of reaction; heterogeneous reactions, applications. Nanomaterials for tribological applications. Recent
kinetics of solid state-gas (fluid) reactions, elementary steps, rate- trends in tribology: Nanotribology, Green tribology, and Biomimetics.
controlling steps, intrinsic kinetics, chemisorptions, mass transfer in
the gas phase and fluid, multicomponent system, Knudsen diffusion, MLL737 polymer Degradation and Stabilization
shrinking core model. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to degradation, thermal and oxidative degradation;
MLL731 Rubber Technology
radiative, mechanical and chemical degradation; biological
3 Credits (3-0-0) degradation; degradation pathways for common polymers; methods
Rubber and elastomers, compounding and vulcanization, mastication, to monitor degradation; mechanical degradation, waste management.
fillers-reinforcing and non-black (loading type). Other compounding
MLL738 Electronic Devices and Characterization
ingredients; peptizers, vulcanizing agents, accelerators, accelerator
activator, softeners, anti-aging additives, miscellaneous additives, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
colourant, flame retarders, blowing agents, deodorants, abrasive Pre-requisite(s): PYL100, MLL211 or equivalent for UG
retarders etc. Processing and vulcanization tests, vulcanization theory
Overview of semiconductor fundamentals, Semiconductor junctions,
and technology, natural and synthetic rubbers, stryene butadiene
Solar cells and LEDs, Metal – Semiconductor junctions: Schottky and
rubbers, polybutadiene and polyisoprene rubbers, ethylene-propylene
Ohmic contacts, Thermionic-emission, Capacitance (C)– Voltage(V)
rubber, butyl and halobutyl rubber, nitrile and silicone rubber,
measurements: Doping-Density and majority carrier density profiling,
thermoplastic elastomers, acrylate and fluoro elastomers.
Metal-insulator-semiconductor junctions: MOS capacitor, C-V
characteristics; Introduction to MOSFETs; Fin-FET MOSFET, Inverted
MLL732 porous Materials
field effect transistors and characterization of thin films.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Defects as recombination-generation centres or traps; Measurement
Porous materials: Introduction, processing and structure; Properties of of defect density using Capacitance measurements (C-t), Steady
porous materials: Mechanical (in-plane and out-of-plane) and thermal and transient measurement Current measurement and Deep
properties; Deformation behaviour of porous solids, Mechanics of Level Transient Spectroscopy (DLTS), Charge Carrier Life time and
honeycombs, foams and fibrous structures; Microstructure design; diffusion length: Generation and Recombination life time, Surface
lattice materials; Characterization and application of porous materials. generation and recombination velocity; Photoconductance decay;
Photoluminescence Decay.
MLL733 polymer Reaction Engineering
MLL739 polymeric Coatings
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC75
General introduction, basic coating formulations, solvent borne
Course covers reaction kinectics in condensation and all types of
formulations, waterborne formulations, radiation curing formulations,
addition polymerisation reactions, prediction of molecular weight for
additives and particulates, application methods – conventional
polymerisation in different types of reactors, batch and continuous
deposition techniques, laboratory and industrial methods -
processes, the effect of mixing on kinetics and MWD, reactor design.
doctorblade coating, spin coating and dip coating, powder coating,
automotive coatings, electrodeposition, physical chemical aspects
MLL734 Texture and Grain Boundary Engineering in
– intermolecular and mesoscopic interactions, interfacial aspects,
Metals and Alloys
dispersions, emulsions, self -assembly, mechanism of adhesion of
3 Credits (3-0-0) polymeric coatings on various substrates, tribological properties of
coatings, selection criteria for various substrates. antifouling coatings,
Pre-requisite(s): MLL701 or equivalent for PG, MLL102 or
biofoulants, high temperature coatings, self-replenishing and self-
equivalent for UG
healing coatings. Health, safety hazard and environmental aspects
Representation of crystallographic texture (pole figure, orientation of coatings during manufacturing and applications.
distribution, representation in orientation space, volume fraction of
texture components), experimental determination of texture using MLL740 Nanostructures and Nanomaterials
X-Ray diffraction, texture measurements using synchrotron X-Rays, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron
Overview of Nanostructures and Nanomaterials: Scaling laws,
microscopy (TEM), texture evolution during metal solidification and
Dimensionality, Hybrid nanomaterials; Effect of size, structure,
during phase transformation, texture during material deformation,
mechanism, and property on material performance; Synthesis of
texture during material heat treatment (annealing), texture in thin
nanostructures: Bottom up and top down approaches, Thermodynamics
films, influence of texture on material properties, texture control in
of Nanomaterials: Configurational entropy and Gibbs free energy
engineering materials with examples.
of nanocrystals; Surface reconstruction and reconfiguration.
Nanoelectronics: single electron phenomenon, Quantum transport
MLL735 polymer product & Mould Design
of electrons, Electrical conductance through a single atom, nanowire,
3 Credits (2-0-2)
nanotubes; Single electron transistor; Molecular electronics.
Pre-requisite(s): EC75 Photonic properties of nanomaterials: Surface plasmon resonance
Course covers the types of moulds and dies, product and mould in metals, bandgap variation in semiconductors, optical tweezers,
design, details of construction and manufacturing methods of tools, photonic crystals.
dies and moulds. Nanomechanics: Nanomechanical oscillators using beams
and atoms, Scanning probe microscopy, Nanomagnetism:
MLL736 Tribology and Surface Engineering of Materials Magnetic properties of small magnetic clusters, nanoparticles,
Magnetoresistance, Spintronics, Superparamagnetism.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Surfaces and characterization of surface properties relevant for MLL741 Biodegradable polymeric Materials
tribological applications. Mechanics of surfaces in contact. Laws
3 credits (3-0-0)
of friction, friction at macroscopic and microscopic length scales.
Fundamentals of lubrication: solid and liquid lubrication. Mechanisms Pre-requisite(s): EC75
and types of wear, strategies for controlling wear. Friction and wear Concept of biodegradation; mechanism of biodegradation; kinetics
263

Materials Science and Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
of biodegradation; methods to evaluate biodegradation; bioplastics, model; kinetic regimes of grain boundary diffusion; grain boundary
biodegradable polymers and their synthesis; biodegradable polymer segregation; capillarity- and stress-driven diffusion; alloying effect on
blends and composites; technology and processing of biodegradable interfacial reactions; thermodynamic-kinetic approach in advanced
polymers; applications of biodegradable polymers. functional materials.
MLL742 Micro and Nano Fabrication in Materials MLL750 Imperfections in Materials and Applications
Engineering 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): MLL100 or some equivalent basic course in
Overlaps with: MCL331 materials engineering or MLL101, MLL202, APL108, APL104
and MLL251 (for UG programme), CLL732, CML681, CML729,
Introduction to microfabrication, crystal growth and defect, diffusion
and ion implantation, wafer preparation and specifications, thermal ELL211, PYL114 or some equivalent courses on crystal
oxidation: Deal-Grove model of oxidation, rapid thermal annealing, structures and thermodynamics.
pattern transfer by optical and ebeam lithography, photoresist, vacuum Thermodynamics of point defects (vacancies and interstitials) in
science and plasmas, etching, physical (DC and RF sputtering, ebeam metals and ceramics, defect chemistry, diffusion, electronic properties
evaporation) and chemical vapor deposition, stress measurement in and applications, geometrical aspects of dislocations, Volterra and
thin film, silicon micromachining. atomistic models, stress fields and energy of dislocations, forces
on dislocations, dislocation motion and slip, stacking faults and
MLL744 Materials for Additive Manufacturing APBs, dislocations in FCC and BCC metals, Strengthening of alloys
via dislocations and its applications, thermodynamics of interfaces,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Gibbs-Thompson effect, segregation, anisotropy of surface energy,
Pre-requisite(s): for UG: APL102 and for PG: Basics of phase equilibrium shape of crystals, geometry of grain boundaries, high
transformations, thermodynamics and kinetics and low angle boundaries, special and general boundaries, effect of
Introduction to various types of additive manufacturing processes for grain boundary character on properties.
polymers, metals and ceramics, Basics of polymer printing, Basics
of powder metal printing of metals, Welding metallurgy applied MLL752 Creep and Superplasticity of Materials
to electron and laser based powder bed/wire feed, and powder 3 Credits (3-0-0)
feed methods, Metal powder making, Solidification, Microstructure
Pre-requisite(s): MLL101, MLL202, MLL251, PYL114 or some
formation at high cooling rates, Defects in metal 3D printing,
equivalent course in crystallography, APL104/APL105, APL108 is
Characterization of 3D printed materials, Mechanical behavior of 3D
printed metals, Special topics: Ti, Inconel, steel and Al 3D printing, preferred for students from other departments, PYL701 or some
Basics of ceramic 3D printing, Applications of 3D printed materials. introductory course in materials engineering for PG students.
Phenomenology of creep, Microstructural considerations in metals,
MLL746 Crystals, Symmetry and Tensors alloys, ceramics and composites, Creep mechanisms, Deformation
mechanism maps, Phenomenology of superplasticity in metallic
5 Credits (3-2-0)
alloys, ceramics and nanophase materials, Commercial applications
Geometrical crystallography: Crystals, Lattice and Motif, Miller
and considerations, Cavitation failure at elevated temperatures by the
indices of planes and directions, Reciprocal lattice, Structure and
nucleation, growth and interlinkage of cavities. Sintering mechanisms.
metric matrices.
Symmetry: Point and Space groups, Mathematical groups, MLL760 Materials Simulation Methods using High
Subgroups. Cosets, Lagrange’s theorem, Stereographic and matrix performance Computing
representation of Symmetry operations. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Symmetry based classification of crystals, Proper and improper
Pre-requisite(s): UG students: MLL213 or MLL212
rotation axes, Euler’s construction, Glide Planes in 2D and the 17
Overview of length and time scales in materials modeling and
plane groups, Possible screw axes.
high performance computing in materials. Molecular simulation
Cartesian tensors: Definition, Rank, Representation quadric,
methods: Interatomic potentials: potential energy surface, Molecular
Magnitude of a property in a given direction.
Dynamic (MD) basics and algorithm. Enhanced sampling methods.
Second-rank tensor properties: Electrical and Thermal Free energy landscapes of materials, collective coordinates, phase
conductivity, Thermal expansion coefficient, Piezoelectricity and third diagrams, Replica Exchange Molecular Dynamics, Umbrella Sampling,
rank tensors, Elasticity and fourth rank tensors, Voigt matrix notation metadynamics, Thermodynamic Integration, An overview of Mesoscale
for elastic stiffness and compliances. methods: Brownian Dynamics, Dissipative Particle Dynamics. High
performance computing (HPC) in materials simulations: Introduction
MLL748 Solid State Diffusion and Kinetics to HPC architecture and organization: memory hierarchy, shared
3 Credits (3-0-0) and distributed memory architectures, multiprocessor architecture,
Accelerators (GPU), Performance prediction and evaluation, running
Pre-requisite(s): Introductory courses on materials, such as
simulations in HPC environment, cluster level load balancing,
CLL141, MLL100; MLL702, CLL732, CLL252, MLL713, or some Parallelization in popular software like LAMMPS and GROMACS:
equivalent courses dealing with thermodynamics of solids. domain/spatial decomposition, distribution of nonbonded interaction,
Thermodynamic stability diagrams; chemical potential gradient; Gibbs- dynamic load balancing, multiprocessor communication. Hands-
Duhem equation; steady-state and non-steady states; Fick’s laws of on lab: Application in different materials systems: conformational
diffusion; Fick’s second law for thin-film and homogenization; random transitions in polymers, Simulations of nanomaterials, biomaterials,
walk model; tracer method; jump frequency and correlation factor; modeling and simulation of colloidal dispersion, melting of metal
effect of orientation and phase transition on diffusion; point defects in cluster. (Basic knowledge of Linux will be useful
crystalline materials; atomic mechanism of diffusion in stoichiometric
MLN710 Research Seminar
and non-stoichiometric oxides, ionic solids and intermetallics;
Kirkendall effect; types of diffusion coefficients; vacancy wind effect; 1 Credit (0–0–2)
analytical diffusion models; time-dependent growth laws; interface Each student will be given a topic related to his M.Tech project work
and diffusion-controlled growth; microstructural evolution of the in his chosen stream area and asked to do literature study and give
interfacial reaction zones in bulks, thin films and nanomaterials; a research seminar.
physicochemical approach; diffusion in multicomponent systems;
phase diagram determination by diffusion couple method; short-circuit MLV705 Special Topics in Materials
diffusion; temperature-, purity- and strain-effects on diffusion; Fisher 1 Credit (1–0–0)
264

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Materials Science and Engineering
The contents of this course will be decided by the coordinator in MLV700 Special Lectures in polymers
consultation with the experts of the various materials areas or streams 1 Credit (1-0-0)
(example: electronic materials, nano materials, bio materials etc.).
There will only be special lectures followed by a final assignment or
quiz or a presentation.
MLV700 Special Lectures in polymers
1 Credit (1-0-0)
MLD799 Minor project
There will only be special lectures followed by a final assignment or quiz.
3 Credits (0-0-6)
pTp709 polymer Science Laboratory A project in any area of polymers as decided by the supervisor
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Experiments: identification of polymers; purification of monomers; MLD801 M.Tech project part-I
suspension polymerization of styrene; emulsion polymerization of
9 Credits (0–0–18)
vinyl acetate and butyl acrylate; bulk and solution polymerization
The project/research topic will be decided/allotted by the student’s
of methyl methacrylate; preparation and testing of epoxy resins;
assigned M.Tech project supervisor after successfully completing the
unsaturated polyester resin technology; preparation of nylon 6
core and elective course credit requirements.
and nylon 10 by interfacial polymerization; copolymerization and
determination of reactivity ratios; epoxide equivalent; molecular
weight determination by viscometry and end-group analysis; atom MLD802 M.Tech. project part-II
transfer radical polymerization of styrene; thermal characterization 9 Credits (0–0–18)
by DSC and TGA; GPC; FTIR and NMR.
The project/research topic will be decided/allotted by the student’s
assigned M.Tech. project supervisor after successfully completing the
pTp710 polymer Engineering Lab
core and elective course credit requirements.
1 Credit (0-0-2)
The course comprises of eight regular expreriments on various MLD811 Major project part-I
processing equipments and two experientys dealing with rheology
6 Credits (0-0-12)
of polymer melts.
A project in any area of polymer science and technology.
MLS800 Independent Study
3 Credits (0-3-0) MLD812 Major project part-II
The course contents are as defined for the program elective courses 12 Credits (0-0-24)
offered by the Department. A project in any area of polymer science and technology.
265

Department of Mathematics
MTL100 Calculus MTL104 Linear Algebra and Applications
4 Credits (3-1-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of limit, continuity and differentiability, uniform continuity. Pre-requisite(s): MTL101
Mean value theorems and applications, Taylor’s theorem, maxima and
Overlaps with: MTL502
minima. Sequences and series, limsup, liminf, convergence of sequences
and series of real numbers, absolute and conditional convergence. Introduce Fields: fields of numbers, finite fields. Review basis and
dimension of a vector space, linear transformations, eigenvalue and
Riemann integral, fundamental theorem of integral calculus, applications
eigenvector of an operator. LU Factorization. Some applications giving
of definite integrals, improper integrals, beta and gamma functions.
rise to Linear Systems Problems
Functions of several variables, limit and continuity, partial derivatives
Dual and double dual of a vector space and transpose of a linear
and differentiability, gradient, directional derivatives, chain rule, Taylor’s
transformation. Diagonalizability of linear operators of finite
theorem, maxima and minima and the method of Lagrange multipliers.
dimensional vector spaces, simultaneous triangulization and
Double and triple integration, Jacobian and change of variables simultaneous diagonalization. The primary decomposition theorem
formula. Parameterization of curves and surfaces, vector fields, - diagonal and nilpotent parts.
divergence and curl. Line integrals, Green’s theorem, surface integral, Inner product spaces, Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization, best
Gauss and Stokes’ theorems with applications. approximation of a vector by a vector belonging a given subspace and
application to least square problems. Adjoint of an operator, hermitian,
MTL101 Linear Algebra and Differential Equations unitary and normal operators. Singular Value Decomposition and its
4 Credits (3-1-0) applications. Spectral decomposition. Introduction of bilinear and
quadratic forms.
Vector spaces over Q, R and C, subspaces, linear independence, linear
span of a set of vectors, basis and dimension of a vector space, sum
MTL105 Algebra
and direct sum.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Systems of linear (homogeneous and non-homogeneous) equations,
matrices and Gauss elimination, elementary row operations, row Overlaps with: MTL501
space, column space, null space and rank of a matrix. Preliminaries: Equivalence relations and partitions.
Linear transformation, rank-nullity theorem and its applications, matrix Groups: Subgroups, Cyclic groups, Abelian groups, permutation
representation of a linear transformation, change of basis and similarity. groups; Langrange’s theorem, normal subgroups, quotient groups,
isomorphism theorems. Direct product of groups, structure theorem of
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors, characteristic and minimal polynomials,
finitely generated abelian groups, Sylow’s theorems and applications.
Cayley-Hamilton theorem (without proof) and applications.
Rings: Definition and examples, units and zero divisors. Ideals and
Review of first order differential equations, Picard’s theorem, linear
quotients, principal ideals, prime ideals, maximal ideals, integral
dependence and Wronskian. Dimensionality of space of solutions,
domain, PID, Euclidean domain, UFD. Modules over a commutative
linear ODE with constant coefficients of second and higher order,
ring with unity: Free module, quotient module, exact sequences.
Cauchy-Euler equations, Method of undetermined coefficients and
Fields: Finite fields, field extensions, splitting fields.
method of variation of parameters. Boundary Value Problems: Sturm-
Liouville eigenvalue problems. System of linear differential equations MTL106 probability and Stochastic processes
with constant coefficients, fundamental matrix, matrix methods.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Power Series and its convergence, power series method, Fourier
series, Laplace Transform Method. Overlaps with: MTL108
Axioms of probability, Probability space, Conditional probability,
MTL102 Differential Equations Independence, Bayes’ rule, Random variable, Some common
3 Credits (3-0-0) discrete and continuous distributions, Distribution of Functions of
Random Variable, Moments, Generating functions, Two and higher
Overlaps with: MTL260
dimensional distributions, Functions of random variables, Order
Systems of differential equations, Existence and uniqueness theorems statistics, Conditional distributions, Covariance, Correlation coefficient,
for initial value problems of semilinear and nonlinear ODEs, continuous conditional expectation, Modes of convergences, Laws of large
dependence and well-posed ness; Comparison theorems of Sturms, numbers, Central limit theorem, Definition of Stochastic process,
Sturm-Liouville eigenvalue problems; Phase-plane analysis, Linear and Classification and properties of stochastic processes, Simple Markovian
Non-linear stability, Liapunov functions and applications;First order stochastic processes, Gaussian processes, Stationary processes,
Partial differential equations, Method of characteristics, local and Discrete and continuous time Markov chains, Classification of states,
global solutions, envelop of solutions, complete and general solutions; Limiting distribution, Birth and death process, Poisson process, Steady
Second order equations: Heat and Wave equation, fundamental state and transient distributions, Simple Markovian queuing models
solutions, method of eigenfunctions, Duhamel’s principle. Maximum (M/M/1, M/M/1/N, M/M/c/N, M/M/N/N, M/M/∞).
priciples for Heat and Laplace equation,Greens functions.
MTL107 Numerical Methods and Computations
MTL103 Optimization Methods and Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MTL509, CLL113, CVL763
Overlaps with: MTL508, CLL782, MCL261 Errors in computation: source and types of errors, error propagation.
Linear programming - formulation through examples from Computer representation of numbers: floating point representation,
engineering / business decision making problems, preliminary rounding error and floating point arithmetic. Roots of nonlinear
theory and geometry of linear programs, basic feasible solution, equation in one variable: Direct and iterative methods, order of
simplex method, variants of simplex method. Duality and its convergence. Iterative methods for roots of nonlinear system
principles, interpretation of dual variables, dual simplex method. of equations. Linear systems of equations: Direct and iterative
Linear integer programming, applications in real decision making methods, rate of convergence of iterative methods, Condition
problems, methods to solve linear integer programs, transportation number and ill-conditioned systems. Interpolation: Lagrange,
problems: theory and methodology, assignment problems. Zero- Newton divided difference formula, Newton’s interpolations,
sum matrix games, saddle point, linear programming formulation errors in interpolation. Approximation: least square and uniform
of matrix games, network optimization problems LPP formulation. approximations. Differentiation: differentiation using interpolation
Nonlinear programming, Lagrange function, KKT optimality formulas. Integration using interpolation: Newton-Cotes formulas,
conditions, sufficiency of KKT under convexity of quadratic Gauss quadrature rules. Ordinary differential equations: Taylor, Euler
programming, Wolfe’s method, applications of quadratic programs. and Runge-Kutta methods. Implementation of these methods.
266

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
MTL108 Introduction to Statistics MTL260 Boundary Value problems
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MTL106, MTL390 Pre-requisite(s): MTL100, MTL101
Measures of central tendency, Dispersion, Skewness, Kurtosis, Sturm Liouville problem, Boundary Value Problems for
Data Representation using Histogram, Pie Chart, Boxplot, Biplot, nonhomogeneous ODEs, Green’s Functions. Fourier Series and
Multi Dimensional Scaling etc. Concept of Random Variable, Some Integrals: Periodic Functions and Fourier Series, Arbitrary Period and
common discrete and continuous distributions, Distribution of Half-Range Expansions, Fourier Integral theorem and convergence
Functions of Random Variables, Bivariate and Multivariate random of series Parabolic equations: Heat equation, Fourier series solution,
variables. Sampling Distribution, Theory of Estimation, Properties of Different Boundary Conditions, Generalities on the Heat Conduction
an estimator, Cramer Rao Theorem, Rao Blackwellization, One-sample Problems on bounded and unbounded domains and applications in
and Two sample tests of Proportion, mean, variance, Critical regions, Option pricing.
Neyman Pearson Lemma. Tests for Goodness of fit, Chi-square Test, The Wave Equation: The Vibrating String, Solution of the Vibrating
Kolmogorov Smirnov Test, One sample and paired sample tests: Sign String Problem, d’Alembert’s Solution, One-Dimensional Wave
Test, Signed-rank Test, Run tests etc. Linear regression, Non-linear Equation
regression, Logit and Probit Methods.
The Potential Equation: Potential Equation in a Rectangle, Fourier
series method, Potential equation in Unbounded Regions, Fourier
MTL122 Real and Complex Analysis
integral representations, Potential in a Disk and Limitations.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Higher Dimensions and Other Coordinates: Two-Dimensional Wave
Pre-requisite(s): MTL100 Equation: Derivation, Parabolic equation, Solution by Fourier series,
Overlaps with: MTL503, MTL506 Problems in Polar Coordinates, Temperature in a Cylinder, Vibrations
of a Circular Membrane.
Metric spaces: Definition and examples. Open, closed and bounded
sets. Interior, closure and boundary. Convergence and completeness. Finite dimensional approximations of solutions, piecewise linear
Continuity and uniform continuity. Connectedness, compactness and polynomials and introduction to different methods like Galerkin and
separability. Heine-Borel theorem. Pointwise and uniform convergence Petrov-Galerkin method.
of real-valued functions. Equicontinuity. Ascoli-Arzela theorem. Limits,
continuity and differentiability of functions of a complex variable. MTL265 Mathematical programming Techniques
Analytic functions, the Cauchy-Riemann equations. Definition of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
contour integrals, Cauchy’s integral formula and derivatives of analytic
Pre-requisite(s): MTL103
functions. Morera’s and Liouville’s theorems. Maximum modulus
principle. Taylor and Laurent series. Isolated singular points and Overlaps with: COL756
residues. Cauchy’s residue theorem and applications. Recall of linear programming simplex algorithm and dual problem;
primal-dual simplex method, linear programs with upper bounds,
MTL145 Number Theory network optimization, network simplex method for non-capacitated
3 Credits (3-0-0) and capacitated networks; dynamic programming, principle
Divisibility: basic definition, properties, prime numbers, some of optimality, general insight followed by in-depth examples;
results on distribution of primes; Congruences: basic definitions complexity of simplex algorithm, Karmarkar’s interior point method;
and properties, complete and reduced residue systems, theorems nonlinear programming, KKT conditions, convex programs, linear
of Fermat, Euler & Wilson, application to RSA cryptosystem, fractional programming problems, Charnes and Cooper technique,
linear congruences and Chinese Remainder theorem, quadratic convex simplex method, Rosen projection method; multiobjective
congruences, and Quadratic Reciprocity law; Arithmetical functions: programming problems, applications to engineering and sciences,
examples, with some properties and their rate of growth; Continued Pareto efficient solution, linear multiobjective programs, weighted
fractions, and their connections with Diophantine approximatins, sum approach, scalarization schemes, goal programming.
applications tolinear and Pell’s equations; Binary quadratic forms;
Partition: basic properties and results; Diophatine equations: linear MTL270 Measure Integral and probability
and quadratic, some general equations. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MTL510
MTL146 Combinatorics
Measurable spaces, measurable sets, measurable functions, measure,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
outer measures and generation of measure, Lebesgue integration,
Pre-requisite(s): MTL180 basic integration theorem, comparison of Lebesgue and Riemann
Basic counting techniques; principle of inclusion and exclusion; integrals, various modes of convergence of measurable functions,
recurrences and generating functions; Systems of Distinct signed measure, Hahn and Jordan decomposition theorems, the
Representatives & Hall’s theorem; Extremal Set theory; Projective Radon-Nikodym theorem, product measures and Fubini’s theorem,
and combinatorial geometries; Latin squares; Designs & Steiner Triple probability measures and spaces, independent events, conditional
Systems; Ramsey theory. probability, theorem of total probability, random variables, distribution
and distribution function of a random variable, independent random
MTL180 Discrete Mathematical Structures variable, expectation, convergence in distribution of a sequence
4 Credits (3-1-0) of random variables, weak and strong laws of large numbers,
Kolmogorov’s zero-one law, the central limit theorem, identically
Overlaps with: COL202
distributed summands, the Linderberg and Lyapounov theorems.
Logic : Propositional Logic: language of propositional logic, truth
table, natural deduction, predicate logic: language of predicate logic, MTp290 Computing Laboratory
Logical inference with Quantifiers. Proof techniques: Introduction
2 Credits (0-0-4)
to different standard proof techniques. Set Theory: Review of Basic
Set Operations, cardinality of a set. Relations : Types of relations, Pre-requisite(s): MTL101
operations of relations and applications, Poset, topological ordering; Programming concepts. Implementation of matrix operations,
Congruence arithmetic; Combinatorics: Counting techniques: Pigeon Complexity in Matrix Operations, Implementation of linear algebraic
Hole principle, inclusion exclusion principle, recurrence relation and solvers; solution of systems of linear equations. Gauss elimination,
generating function; Graph Theory : Graph as a discrete structure, LU decomposition and Iterative methods. Implementation of several
Modeling applications using graphs, Hamiltonian graphs, Planar Numerical Integration algorithms, Initial value problems and Boundary
graphs, Graph coloring, Matching. Value Problems for ODEs.
267

Mathematics Courses of Study 2024-2025
MTL342 Analysis and Design of Algorithms MTD421 B.Tech. project
4 Credits (3-1-0) 4 Credits (0-0-8)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL180 Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Overlaps with: COL351 Contents will be related to topic from the courses undertaken by the
student in the programme.
Models of computation: RAM and Turing Machines; Algorithm Analysis
techniques; Basic techniques for designing algorithms: dynamic
MTL445 Computational Methods for Differential
programming, divide-and-conquer and Greedy; DFS , BFS and their
applications; Some Basic Graph Algorithms; linear time sorting Equations
algorithms; NP-Completeness and Approximation Algorithms. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL107
MTD350 Mini project
3 Credits (0-0-6) Overlaps with: MTL712, CLL113
Numerical methods for solving IVPs for ODEs: Difference equations,
Pre-requisite(s): EC 80
Routh-Hurwitz criterion, Test Equation. Single step methods: Taylor
Depends on the project topic. series method, explicit Runge-Kutta methods, convergence, order,
relative and absolute stability. Multistep methods: Development
MTL390 Statistical Methods
of linear multistep method using interpolation and undetermined
4 Credits (3-1-0) parameter approach, convergence, order, relative and absolute
stability, Predictor Corrector methods. Solution of initial value
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106
problems of systems of ODES. BVP: Finite difference methods for
Overlaps with: MTL108 second order ODEs, Eigenvalue problems.
Basic concepts and Data Visualization: Measures of central tendency, PDEs: Finite difference methods for Elliptic PDEs, Consistency, stability
Dispersion, Skewness, Kurtosis, Data Representation using Histogram, and convergence. Boundary Conditions. FD methods for Parabolic
Pie Chart, Boxplot, Biplot, Multi Dimensional Scaling etc. Revision of equations in 1D and 2D. Operator splitting methods, Convergence,
Probability Distribution: Emphasis on Normal, Chi-Square, Student’s stability and consistency of difference methods. Higher order
T, F distributions; Order Statistics: Different Order Statistics and their methods. Introduction to Hyperbolic PDEs, FD methods. Upwind
single and joint Distribution; Sampling Distribution of Mean, Variance; schemes, Consistency, stability and convergence of schemes. Second
Generation of Random Numbers following certain distributions; order schemes.
Theory of Estimation (Point and Interval)Properties of an estimator,
MVUE, BLUE, Cramer-Rao Inequality, Rao-Blackwell Theorem; Testing
MTL458 Operating Systems
of Hypothesis: Mean and Variance, Confidence Interval, Neyman-
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pearson Lemma; Non-Parametric Methods Run Tests, Rank Tests,
Signed Rank Tests, Kruskal Wallis Test, Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test Pre-requisite(s): MTL342
etc.; Regression Analysis Linear Regression, Multiple Regression,
Overlaps with: COL331, ELL405
Logit, Probit, Regression.
Operating Systems functions, Basic Concepts, Notion of a process,
concurrent processes, problem of mutual exclusion, Deadlock, process
MTL411 Functional Analysis
Scheduling, memory management, multiprogramming, File systems;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
time sharing systems and their design consideration.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL104 and MTL122
MTL501 Algebra
Overlaps with: MTL602
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Review of some basic concepts in metric spaces and topological
spaces; Normed linear spaces and Banach spaces, Examples of Groups, subgroups, Lagrange theorem, quotient groups, isomorphism
Banach spaces, Bounded linear operators and examples, Finite theorems; cyclic groups, dihedral groups, symmetric groups,
dimensional Banach spaces; Introduction of Lebesgue integration on alternating groups; simple groups, simplicity of alternating groups;
real line, Fatou’s lemma, monotone convergence theorem, dominated Group action, Sylow theorems and applications; free abelian groups,
convergence theorem, Lp spaces; Hahn Banach extension theorem, structure of finitely generated abelian groups; Solvable and nilpotent
Hahn Banach separation theorem, Uniform boundedness principle, groups, composition series, Jordan-Holder theorem.
Open mapping theorem, Closed graph theorem; Characterization Rings, examples: polynomial rings, formal power series, matrix rings,
of dual of certain concrete Banach spaces; Schauder basis and group rings; prime ideals, maximal ideals, quotient rings, isomorphism
separability, Reflexive Banach spaces, Best approximation in Banach theorems; Integral domains, PID, UFD, Euclidean domains, division
spaces; Hilbert spaces and their geometry; Basic operator theory. rings, field of fractions; primes and irreducibles, irreducibility criteria;
product of rings, Chinese remainder theorem.
MTL415 parallel Algorithms
Field extension, algebraic extension, algebraic closure, straight
3 Credits (3-0-0) edge and compass constructions, splitting fields, separable and
Pre-requisite(s): MTL342 inseparable extensions, fundamental theorem of Galois theory;
solvability by radicals.
Overlaps with: MTL765
Parallel architecture: Shared/local memory systems, pipelining, MTL502 Linear Algebra
hypercubes, mesh, linear array etc. Degree of parallelism, Speed-up
4 Credits (3-1-0)
and efficiency of a parallel algorithm. Principles of parallel algorithm
design. Basic communication operations. Parallel algorithms: Revision of existence-uniqueness of solutions of a system of linear
searching and sorting, matrix-vector and matrix-matrix multiplication equations, elementary row operations, row-reduced echelon matrices.
for dense, band and triangular matrices. Parallel algorithms for Vector spaces, span of a subset, bases and dimension, quotient
direct methods for dense, band and triangular matrices. Cholesky spaces, direct sums. Linear transformations, rank-nullity, matrix
method. Solving recurrence relations. Parallel iterative methods for representation of a linear transformation, algebra of linear
finite difference equations of elliptic boundary value problems: point- transformations, dual space, transpose of a linear transformation.
Jacobi, line Jacobi, block Jacobi methods, 2 colour and multicolour Eigenvalues, eigenvectors, annihilating polynomials, Cayley-Hamilton
Gauss-Seidel, SOR, SSOR methods. Domain decomposition method in theorem, invariant subspaces, triangulable and diagonalizable linear
one and two dimensions. Parallel preconditioned conjugate gradient operators. Simultaneous triangulation and diagonalization, Primary
methods. Quadrant interlocking factorization. decomposition theorem, Jordan decomposition.
268

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
Inner product spaces over R (real numbers) and C (complex numbers), Tychonoff theorem, characterizations of compact metric spaces.
Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization process, orthogonal projection, Countability Axioms: First countable spaces, Second countable spaces,
best approximation. Adjoint of a linear operator, unitary and normal Separable spaces, Lindeloff spaces.
operators, spectral theory of normal operators. Bilinear forms,
Separation Axioms: Hausdorff, Regular and Normal spaces; Urysohn’s
symmetric and skew-symmetric bilinear forms.
lemma; Uryohn’s Metrization theorem; Tietze extension theorem.
MTL503 Real Analysis Completely metrizable spaces, Baire’s category theorem and
Function Spaces.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Elementary set theory, Countable and Uncountable sets, Real number
MTL508 Mathematical programming
system and its order completeness.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Metric spaces, Continuous and uniformly continuous functions,
Homeomorphism and isometry, Completeness, Fixed Points, Linear programs formulation through examples from
Baire’s Category Theorem, Totally bounded metrics, Compactness, engineering / business decision making problems, preliminary theory
Connectedness. and geometry of linear programs, basic feasible solution, simplex
method, variants of simplex method, like two phase method and
Sequences and series of functions, Pointwise and uniform convergence
revised simplex method; duality and its principles, interpretation
of sequences of functions, Equicontinuity, Arzelà-Ascoli Theorem, Dini’s
of dual variables, dual simplex method, primal-dual method; linear
Theorem, Stone-Weierstrass Theorems (Lattice and algebra versions).
integer programs, their applications in real decision making problems,
Functions of several variables, Linear transformations, Differentiation, cutting plane and branch and bound methods, transportation
Inverse function theorem, Implicit Function theorem, Derivatives of problems, assignment problems, network maximum flow problems;
higher order. complexity of simplex method, ellipsoid method, Karmarkar’s interior
point method; nonlinear programming, Lagrange multipliers, Farkas
MTL504 Ordinary Differential Equations lemma, constraint qualification, KKT optimality conditions, sufficiency
4 Credits (3-1-0) of KKT under convexity; quadratic programs, Wolfe method,
applications of quadratic programs in some domains like portfolio
Initial value problems, Cauchy-Picard Theorem. General theory
optimization and support vector machines, etc.
of linear differential systems. Sturms theory on separation and
comparison properties of solutions, Boundary value problems, Green
MTL509 Numerical Analysis
functions, Sturm-Liouville problems, Weyl-Titschmarsh theorem
for unbounded interval- limit cycle, limit point cases. Power series 4 Credits (3-1-0)
method, regular singular points, Legendre ansBassel equations, Numerical Algorithms and errors, Floating point systems, Roundoff
Linear system with constant coefficients, fundamental matrix, linear error accumulations. Interpolation: Lagrange Interpolation Newton’s
systems with periodic coefficients. Critical points, phase plane analysis divided difference interpolation. Finite differences. Hermite
and concepts of linear and nonlinear stability. Autonomous systems Interpolation. Cubic splines. Numerical differentiation. Numerical
and applications. Integration: Newton cotes formulas, Gaussian Quadrature composite
quadrature formulas
MTL505 Computer programming
Approximation: Least squares approximation, minimum maximum
4 Credits (3-1-0) error techniques. Legendre and Chebyshev polynomials. Solution of
Introduction to Computers - CPU, ALU, I/O devices, Nonlinear equations: Fixed point iteration,bisection, Secant,Regula-
Falsi, Newton-Raphson methods. Solution of linear systems: Direct
Introduction to C Programming - Data types, Looping Statements,
methods, Gauss elimination, LU and Cholesky factorizations. Iterative
Arrays, Structure, Functions (Both simple and Recursive function),
methods – Jacobi, Gauss- Seidel and SOR methods. System of
Call by Value and Call by reference, Pointers, File Handling in C
nonlinear equation, Eigen-Value problems: Power and Inverse power
Introduction to C++ Programming , Looping Statements ,arrays and method. Numerical Solution of ODE. Taylor series, Euler and Runge-
Structures in C++, Functions in C++,Basic OOPS concepts. Kutta methods.
MTL506 Complex Analysis MTL510 Measure and Integration
4 Credits (3-1-0) 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Field of complex numbers, complex plane, polar representation, Outer measures, measures and measurable sets, Lebesgue measure
stereographic projection. on R, Borel measure
Analytic functions, Cauchy-Riemann equation, harmonic conjugates,
Measurable functions, simple functions, Egoroff’s theorem, Lebesgue
power series, MÖbius transforms.
integral and its properties, monotone convergence theorem,
Contour integrals, power series representation of an analytic function, Fatou’s Lemma, Dominated convergence theorem various modes of
zeros of an analytic function, Liouville’s theorem and applications. convergence and their relations
Index of a closed curve, Cauchy’s theorem, Cauchy integral formula, Signed measures, Hahn and Jordan decomposition theorems,
Open mapping theorem, Goursat’s theorem. Lebesgue-Radon-Nikodym theorem, Lebesgue decomposition
Isolated singularities, Laurent Series, Residue theorem and application theorem, the representation of positive linear functionals on C c (X)
to real integrals. Meromorphic functions, Argument principle and Product measures, iterated integrals, Fubini’s and Tonelli’s theorems
Rouche’s theorem. Lp spaces and their completeness, conjugate space of Lp for 1 < p<
Maximum modulus principle and Schwarz’s Lemma. infinity, conjugate space of L for sigma-finite measure space
1
Differentiation of monotone functions, functions of bounded variation,
MTL507 Topology differentiation of an integral, absolute continuity.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
MTL601 probability and Statistics
Topological spaces: Definitions and Examples, Basis and Subbasis
for a Topology, limit points, closure, interior; Continuous functions, 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Homeomorphisms; Subspace Topology, Metric Topology, Product & Probability definition, conditional probability, Bayes theorem,
Box Topology, Order Topology; Quotient spaces. random variables, expectation and variance, specific discrete
Connectedness and Compactness: Connectedness, Path connectedness; and continuous distributions, e.g. uniform, Binomial, Poisson,
Connected subspaces of the real line; Components and local geometric, Pascal, hypergeometric, exponential, normal, gamma,
connectedness; Compact spaces, Limit point compactness, Sequential beta, moment generating function, Poisson process, Chebyshev’s
compactness; Local compactness, One point compactification; inequality, bivariate and multivariate distributions, joint, marginal
269

Mathematics Courses of Study 2024-2025
and conditional distributions, order statistics, law of large numbers, pattern search method, Nelder and Meed method; gradient based
central limit theorem, sampling distributions - Chi-sq, Student’s t, F, methods: Steepest descent method, Newton method, Conjugate
theory of estimation, maximum likelihood test, testing of hypothesis, direction and gradient method, Quasi-Newton methods. Constrained
nonparametric analysis, test of goodness of fit. optimization techniques - penalty method, barrier method, cutting
plane method, projection gradient method. Heuristic technique: like
MTL602 Functional Analysis Genetic programming method to solve non-convex programs.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
MTL712 Computational Methods for Differential
Normed linear spaces, Banach spaces and their examples, quotient
Equations
spaces, bounded linear operators, finite dimensional Banach spaces,
Lp Spaces, Lp spaces as examples for Banach spaces 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Hahn Banach theorems, Uniform boundedness principle, open Pre-requisite(s): MTL107/MTL509
mapping theorem, closed graph theorem, transpose of an operator Numerical methods for solving IVPs for ODEs: Difference equations,
Characterization of the dual of certain Banach spaces Routh-Hurwitz criterion, Test Equation. Single step methods: Taylor
Geometry of Banach spaces - Weak and weak* convergence, series method, explicit Runge-Kutta methods, convergence, order,
relative and absolute stability. Multistep methods: Development
Geometry of Hilbert spaces - Inner product spaces and its properties,
of linear multistep method using interpolation and undetermined
Hilbert spaces and examples, best approximation in Hilbert spaces,
parameter approach, convergence, order, relative and absolute
orthogonal complements, orthonormal basis, dual of a Hilbert space
stability, Predictor Corrector methods. Solution of initial value
Basic operator theory - Adjoint of an operator, self-adjoint operators, problems of systems of ODES. BVP: Finite difference methods for
normal and unitary operators, projections second order ODEs, Eigenvalue problems.
Compact operators, examples and properties, spectral theorem for PDEs: Finite difference methods for Elliptic PDEs, Consistency, stability
the compact self-adjoint operator. and convergnce. Boundary Conditions. FD methods for Parabolic
equations in 1D and 2D. Operator splitting methods, Convergence,
MTL603 Partial Differential Equations stability and consistency of difference methods. Higher order methods.
4 Credits (3-1-0) Introduction to Hyperbolic PDEs, FD methods. Upwind schemes,
Linear and semi-linear equations, Cauchy problem, Method of Consistency, stability and convergence of schemes. Second order
characteristics. Cauchy-Kowalewsky theorem, Holmgren’s Uniqueness schemes.
Theorem. Classification of second order equations, wave equation in
MTL717 Fuzzy Sets and Applications
one space dimension, classical and weak solutions, Duhamel’s principle.
Laplace equation, fundamental solutions, maximum principles and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
mean value formulas, Properties of harmonic functions, Green’s Fuzzy sets, fuzzy relations, matrix representation of fuzzy relations,
function, Energy methods, Perron’s method, Parabolic equations in fuzzy numbers, fuzzy arithmetic, Zadeh’s extension principle,
one space dimension, fundamental solution, maximum principle, ordering fuzzy numbers, ranking functions; Fuzzy aggregation,
existence and uniqueness theorems. Wave equation, Solutions by t-norm, t-conorm, fuzzy negation, other aggregation operators,
spherical means, Non-Homogeneous Problems, Duhamel’s principle, OWA operators; Fuzzy relational equations (FRE), algorithms to
Energy Methods. Nonlinear first order PDE’s: Complete integrals, solve system of FRE; Fuzzy optimization, fuzzy linear program; Fuzzy
Envelopes and singular solutions. Some special methods for finding measures, belief and plausibility, necessity and possibility , Sugeno
solutions: Similarity solutions, Hopf-Cole transformation. and Choquet integrals on finite sets; Fuzzy logic and approximate
reasoning, If-then-else rules, Mamdani model, TSK model, SAM
MTL625 principles of Optimization Theory model; Applications of fuzzy sets and logics in areas of image
3 Credits (3-0-0) processing, control, AI, computing with words, etc.; Generalized fuzzy
sets - like type2 fuzzy sets, rough sets, and Intuitionistic fuzzy sets.
Convex set, hyperplane, relative interior and closure, separation
theorems, theorems of alternatives for linear systems, convex
MTL720 Neurocomputing and Applications
functions and properties of continuity, differentiability etc.,
quasiconvex and pseudoconvex functions and their properties and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
interrelationships, minimax theorems for convex and quasiconvex Biological and Artificial Neuron, Perceptron model, Adaline model,
functions, nonlinear programming, Lagrange function, saddle point, Multilayered feedforward networks, Activation functions, Back-
Fritz John optimality conditions, constraint qualifications, Karush- propagation algorithm and its improvements, Conjugate Gradient
Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) necessary and sufficient optimality conditions, Neural Network, Applications of Back-propagation algorithm to
Wolfe and Mond-Weir duals, Wolfe method for quadratic programs, Statistical Pattern Classification, Feature selection, Classification
Projection gradient method, steepest descent method, conjugate and regression problems, General Regression Neural Networks,
gradient method, rank-1 methods, convergence, conjugate function, Hopfield Network, Recurrent networks, Probabilistic Neural Networks,
Fenchel duality, subgradient and subdifferential, nonsmooth Kohonen’s self-organizing maps with quadratic junctions and its
optimization, tangent cone, normal cone, nonsmooth KKT conditions, applications to character recognition, Adaptive Resonance Theory
nonsmooth optimality conditions, subgradient method, proximal model, Applications of ART model for knowledge acquisition.
method, convergence of these methods, applications to support
vector machines optimization problems. MTL725 Stochastic processes and its Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTD701 project-I
Stochastic processes, specification of stochastic processes, stationary
5 Credits (0-0-10) processes, discrete time and continuous time Markov chains, birth and
death processes, applications in queueing theory. Markov processes
MTD702 project-II with continuous state space, martingales, applications in financial
mathematics. Renewal processes and theory, Markov renewal and
6 Credits (0-0-12)
semi-Markov processes, branching processes.
MTL704 Numerical Optimization
MTL728 Category Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL103/MTL508 Categories, functors and natural transformations, adjoints (of
Unconstrained optimization techniques - one dimensional methods like functors), representable functors, Yoneda Lemma and applications.
Fibonacci method, Golden section method; higher dimension methods: Limits and colimits, interaction between functors and limits. Limits in
270

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
terms of representables and adjoints, limits and colimits of presheaves, MTL733 Stochastic of Finance
interaction between adjoint functors and limits. Application to abelian 3 Credits (3-0-0)
category: complexes of R-modules, long exact sequence, mapping
cone and cylinder, projective and injective resolution, derived functors, Pre-requisite(s): MTL106/MTL601
right and left exactness, Ext and Tor. Concept of presheaf and sheaf, Stochastic Processes; Brownian and Geometric Brownian Motion;
group scheme and Hopf algebra. Levy Processes, Jump-Diffusion Processes; Conditional Expectations
and Martingales; Ito Integrals, Ito’s Formula; Stochastic Differential
MTL729 Computational Algebra and its Applications Equations; Change of Measure, Girsanov Theorem, Martingale
Representation Theorem and Feymann-Kac Theorem; Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of Stochastic Calculus in Finance, Option Pricing, Interest Rate
Finite fields: Construction and examples. Polynomials over finite
Derivatives, Levy Processes in Credit Risk.
fields, their factorization/irreducibility and their applications to
coding theory. Combinatorial applications. Symmetric and Public key MTL734 Introductory Actuarial Mathematics
cryptosystems particularly on Elliptic curves. Combinatorial group
3 Credits (3-0-0)
theory: investigation of groups on computers, finitely presented
groups, coset enumeration. Fundamental problem of combinatorial Pre-requisite(s): MTL106 (Probability and Stochastic Process)/
group theory. Coset enumeration, Nielsen transformations. Braid MTL 108 (Introduction to Statistics)/ MTL601 (Probability and
Group cryptography. Automorphism groups. Computational methods Statistics)
for determining automorphism groups of certain finite groups. Random variables, probability density functions, insurance contract,
Computations of characters and representations of finite groups. nominal and effective interest rates, force of mortality, mortality
Computer algebra programs. Computations of units in rings and group expectations, transition probability using two states model, life
rings. Calculations in Lie algebras. tables, various types of life insurance products, annuity, premium
net premium reserves, policy reserves, appropriateness and quantity
MTL730 Cryptography of insurance, policy pricing, Thiele’s differential equation and its
3 Credits (3-0-0) numerical solution, negative policy values, comparing two insurance
policies; multiple life insurance, joint life insurance, survival and
Overlaps with: COL759
disability benefits, Kolmogorov’s forward equations and solution,
Applying the corresponding algorithms programmes. (laboratory/ Schuette-Nesbitt formula,; population theory, Lexi diagram, pension
design activities could also be included) Classical cryptosystems, and group insurance, other types of insurances like health, property,
Preview from number theory, Congruences and residue class rings, vehicle; interest rate model, yield curve, equity linked insurance,
DES- security and generalizations, Prime number generation. Public stochastic pricing, stochastic reserving, quantile reserving. The
Key Cryptosystems of RSA, Rabin, etc. their security and cryptanalysis. study involves deterministic models in discrete framework (except
Primality, factorization and quadratic sieve, efficiency of other the last part).
factoring algorithms.
Finite fields: Construction and examples. Diffie-Hellman key exchange. MTL735 Advanced Number Theory
Discrete logarithm problem in general and on finite fields. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Cryptosystems based on Discrete logarithm problem such as Massey-
Overlaps with: MTL145
Omura cryptosystems. Algorithms For finding discrete logarithms,
their analysis. Polynomials on finite fields and Their factorization/ Divisibility, prime numbers, Bertrand’s theorem, Congruences,
irreducibility and their application to coding theory. complete & reduced residue systems, theorems of Fermat, Euler, Wilson
& Wolstenholme, solutions of general congruences, study of linear and
Elliptic curves, Public key cryptosystems particularly on Elliptic curves.
system of linear congruences, Chinese Remainder theorem, study of
Problems of key exchange, discrete logarithms and the elliptic curve
quadratic congruences, Quadratic, Cubic & Biquadratic Reciprocity laws,
logarithm problem.
binary and ternary quadratic forms, Continued fractions, Diophantine
Implementation of elliptic curve cryptosystems. Counting of points
approximations and applications to linear and Pell’s equations,
on Elliptic Curves over Galois Fields of order 2m. Other systems
Arithmetical functions, properties, rate of growth, Distribution of
such as Hyper Elliptic Curves And cryptosystems based on them.
primes, Dirichlet’s theorem on primes in arithmetic progression,
Combinatorial group theory: investigation of groups on computers,
Prime Number theorem, Diophantine equations, special cases of the
finitely presented groups, coset enumeration. Fundamental problems
Fermat equation, introduction to classic and modern techniques.
of combinatorial group theory. Coset enumeration, Nielsen and Tietze
transformations. Braid Group cryptography.
MTL736 Analytic Number Theory
Cryptographic hash functions. Authentication, Digital Signatures,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Identification, certification infrastructure and other applied aspects.
Pre-requisite(s): MTLI22 or MTL506
MTL731 Introduction to Chaotic Dynamical Systems Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic, Arithmetic functions, Order and
3 Credits (3-0-0) average order of arithmetic functions, Partial summation formula,
Dirichlet's hyperbola method, Dirichlet convolution, Partial sums of
Topics to be covered include chaos, elementary bifurcations.
Dirichlet convolution, Statement of Prime Number Theorem and its
Sarkovski’s theorem, recurrence and equidistribution, codes, symbolic
equivalent formulations, Chebyshev's Theorem, Bertrand's postulate.
dynamics and chaotic behaviour. Higher dimensional dynamics,
including horseshoes, Henon map. Stability of systems. Dirichlet series, Half plane of convergence and absolute convergence,
Euler product, Riemann zeta function and its analytic continuation
MTL732 Financial Mathematics via Riemann's functional equation, Non-vanishing of Riemann zeta
function on the line Re(s)=1, Proof of Prime Number Theorem,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Dirichlet L-function and its analytic continuation, non-vanishing at
Pre-requisite(s): MTL103/MTL508 s=1, Proof of Dirichlet's theorem for primes in arithmetic progression.
Overlaps with: MCL363/MSL873 Modular group and its action on the upper half plane, Modular forms,
Eisenstein series, Cusp forms, Valence formula, j-function, Hecke
Financial markets, Interest computation, value, growth and discount
operators and their eigenvalues.
factors, derivative products, basic option theory: single and multi-
period binomial pricing models, Cox-Ross-Rubinstein (CRR) model,
MTL737 Differential Geometry
volatility, Black-Scholes formula for option pricing as a limit of
CRR model, Greeks and hedging, Mean-Variance portfolio theory: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Markowitz model, Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), factor models, Curves in plane and space, arc-length, reparametrization, curvature
interest rates and interest rate derivatives, Binomial tree models. of a plane cure, curvature and torsion of a space curve.
271

Mathematics Courses of Study 2024-2025
Simple closed curves, isoperimetric inequality, Four-vertex theorem. Neumann classes, Hilbert-Schmidt operators, trace and trace duality
Surfaces, smooth surfaces and examples, level surfaces, quadric in finite dimensions, duality for Schatten-von Neumann classes.
surfaces, surfaces of revolution, ruled surfaces smooth maps, tangent Functional calculus for self-adjoint operators, square root of positive
space, derivatives, orientability of surfaces. operators, polar decomposition, some topologies on B(H), spectral
The first fundamental form, lengths of curves on surfaces, isometries, measures, the spectral theorem for normal operators.
conformal mappings, equiareal maps.
MTL743 Fourier Analysis
The second fundamental form, Gauss and Weingarten maps, normal
and geodesic curvatures, Gaussian and mean curvatures, principal 3 Credits (3-0-0)
curvatures.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL122/MTL503
Surfaces of constant Gaussian curvature, surfaces of constant mean
Fourier Series - Definition, uniqueness, convolution, summability,
curvature, flat surfaces.
convergence of Fourier series, Fourier series for square integrable
Parallel transport, geodesics and their examples, properties, geodesic functions, Plancheral theorem, Riesz-Fischer theorem, Gibb’s
equations, geodesics as shortest paths, Gauss and Codazzi-Minardi phenomenon, divergence of Fourier series
equations, Theorema Egregium.
Applications of Fourier series – Isoperimetric inequality, Weierstrass
Gauss-Bonnet Theorem. Introduction to hyperbolic and spherical approximation theorem, Weyl’s equidistribution theorem, heat
geometry. equation on the circle.
Fourier transform – Schwartz space on R, Fourier transform on the
MTL738 Commutative Algebra
Schwartz space, Fourier transform of integrable and square-integrable
3 Credits (3-0-0) functions, Poisson summation formula.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL105/MTL501 Tempered distributions – Topology on the Schwartz space, tempered
Revision of Rings and Ideals: Prime and maximal ideals. Chinese distributions and its properties, Fourier transform of tempered
remainder theorem, Nilradical, Jacobson radical, operations on distributions.
ideals, extension and contraction; Module, submodule, quotient Applications – Uncertainty principle, Paley-Wiener theorem, Wiener’s
module, sums and products, Nakayama’s lemma; Homomorphism, theorem, Shannon sampling theorem, multiplier theorem for
kernel, cokernel, direct sum, direct product, universal properties, free integrable functions.
module, exact sequences, tensor product of modules and its exactness
property; Rings and modules of fractions and functorial properties of MTL744 Mathematical Theory of Coding
fractions; Primary decomposition; Integral dependence, going-up and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
going down theorems, valuation rings; Chain conditions, Noetherian
rings, Artinian rings, discrete valuation ring and Dedikind domains, Pre-requisite(s): MTL105/MTL501
fractional ideals; Completion: filtration, graded rings and modules.
Overlaps with: ELL710
Review of communication channels, maximum likelihood and nearest
MTL739 Representation of Finite Groups
neighbour decoding schemes, Hamming distance, Distance of a code.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Structure of finite fields,Linear codes and their duals, Equivalence of
Pre-requisite(s): MTL105/MTL501 linear codes, encoding with a linear code, decoding of a linear code,
Revision of basic group theory. Definition and examples of representation. ISBN Code, Hamming codes. Hadamard matrix codes, Golay codes,
Subrepresentation, sum and tensor product of represenations, Codes and Latin squares. Non-linear codes, Nordstrom-Robinson code,
irreducible representations; Character Theory: Character of a Kerdock codes, Preparata codes. Bounds in coding theory: Sphere-
representation, Schur’s Lemma, Maschke’s theorem, Orthogonality covering bound, Hamming bound and perfect codes, Singleton bound
relations for characters, decomposition of regular representation, and MDS codes, Gilbert-Varshamov bound, Plotkin bound, Griesmer
number of irreducible representations of a group; Representation bound. Weight enumerators, MacWilliams Identity. Construction of
of subgroups and product of groups, induced representations; new codes: Propagation rules, Reed-Muller codes, subfield codes.
Group Algebra: Representations and modules; Decomposition of The structure of cyclic codes, encoding and decoding with a cyclic
complex algebra C[G] and Integrability properties of characters. code, minimal codes, Some special cyclic codes including BCH codes
Induced representations, restriction to subgroups, Reciprocity and their decoding algorithm, Reed-Solomon codes, quadratic
formula, Mackey’s irreducibility criterion; Irreducible representations residue codes. Burst errors, Burst error-correcting codes, decoding
of symmertric groups (S_n) and alternating groups (A_n). of cyclic burst-error-correcting codes. Generalized Reed-Solomon
codes, Alternant codes, Goppa codes, Sudan decoding for generalized
MTL741 Fractal Geometry RS codes.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTL745 Advanced Matrix Theory
Code spaces, Hausdorff metric, Hausdorff measures, fractal
dimensions, Hausdorff dimension, Box-counting dimensions, groups 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and rings of fractal dimension, semigroups of iterated function Review of Linear Algebra; Matrix calculus, Diagonalization, Canonical
schemes(IFS) and self-similarity, Cantor sets, Cantor dusts, Koch forms and invariant Factors. Quadratic forms, Courant-Fischer minimax
Snowflake, Sierpinski’s triangle, Diophantine approximation, chaos and related Theorems. Perron-Frobenius theory, Matrix stability,
games, attractors, fractals, superfractals and multi fractal measures, Inequalities, g-inverses. Direct, iterative, projection and rotation methods
Mandelbrot and Julia sets, random fractals, fractals in Brownian motion. for solving linear systems and eigenvalue problems. Applications.
MTL742 Operator Theory MTL746 Methods of Applied Mathematics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL411/MTL602 Expansion in Eigen functions, Fourier series and Fourier Integral,
Weak and weak*-topologies, closed convex sets, weak compactness, orthogonal expansion, mean square approximation, completeness,
Alaoglu’s theorem, locally convex topologies, separation of points by orthogonal polynomials and their properties.
linear functionals, Krein-Milman theorem, Stone-Weierstrass theorem. Integral transform and their applications.
Normed algebras, resolvent, spectrum, spectral radius, functional Linear function, general variation of a functional, direct variation
calculus, spectral mapping theorem, Gelfand’s theory of commutative methods for solution of boundary value problems.
Banach algebras. Integral equations of voltera and Fredhlom type, seperable and
Basic properties of compact operators, spectral theory of compact symmetric kernels, Hilbert-Schmidth theory, Singular integral
operators, Fredholm alternative, General theory of Schatten-von equations, approximation methods of solving integral equations.
272

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
MTL747 Mathematical Logic MTL755 Algebraic Geometry
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Propositional Logic - Syntax, Semantics and Normal Forms, First Pre-requisite(s): MTL105/MTL501
Order Logic Syntax, Semantics and Normal Forms, Herbrand
Rings of polynomials and their quotients, local rings, DVR, modules,
interpretation, Resolution of PL and FL, Proofs in PL and FL, Axiomatic
free modules, exact sequences. Affine algebraic sets, The Hilbert
Systems, Adequacy and Compactness, Program Verification, Hoare
basis theorem. Hilbert’s Nullstellansatz. Affine varieties: Coordinate
Proof, Godels completeness and incompleteness Theorem, Turing
rings, polynomial maps, coordinate changes, rational functions.
Machines and undecidability of Predicate calculus, Gentzen systems,
Local Properties of plane curves: Multiple points, tangent lines,
Introduction to other logics - Description Logic, Default & Defeasible
multiplicities and local rings, intersection number. Projective varieties:
Logic, Courteous Logic, Modal Logic, Fuzzy logic.
projective algebraic sets, projective plane curves, linear systems of
curves, Bezout’s theorem, Max Noether’s fundamental theorem and
MTL750 Harmonic Analysis and Its Applications its applications. Variety, Morphisms and Rational maps: The Zariski
topology, varieties and their morphism, dimension of varieties,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
rational maps. Resolution of sigularies: Blowing up a point in affine
Schauder bases in Banach spaces, Trigonometric system, Weak and
and projective planes, quadratic transformations and nonsingular
weak* bases, Characterization of Schauder bases, duality of bases,
models of curves.
perturbation of bases.
Absolute and unconditional convergence of series in a Banach space, MTL756 Lie Algebras and Lie Groups
Unconditional bases, Characterization, Scahuder basis for C([0,1])
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and it’s unconditionality.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL105/MTL501
Besel sequences and Riesz bases in Hilbert spaces, Frames in a
Hilbert space, Frame operator, Characterizations of frames, Frame Overlaps with: MTL856
series and its convergence. Definition and examples, solvable and nilpotent Lie algebras,
Fourier transform of L^1 functions on R, convolution of L^1 functions the Engel’s theorem, Lie’s theorem, Cartan’s theorem, killing
and its Fourier transform, Plancherel theorem. form. Representation theory of finite dimensional semisimple
Lie algebras. The Weyl’s theorem, representations of sl(2,C),
Band limited functions, Sampling theorem, Frames of translates, Time-
root space decomposition. Weyl group, Cartan subalgebras and
frequency shifts, Painless nonorthogonal expansions, Nyquest density,
classification of root systems; Definition and examples of matrix Lie
Necessary conditions for frame bounds, Wiener amalgam spaces, Zak
groups. Exponential mapping, Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff formula.
transform, Gabor systems at the critical density, Balian-low theorem.
Representation theory of matrix Lie groups. Representation theory
Wavelet frames, Frame bounds, Admissibility criteria. of SU(2) and SU(3).
MTL751 Symbolic Dynamics MTL757 Introduction to Algebraic Topology
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Shift Spaces, languages, subshifts of finite type, their graph Pre-requisite(s): MTL122/MTL507
representation, sofic shifts, their presentation and characterization,
Homotopy of paths, fundamental group, covering spaces, fundamental
entropy, its properties, conjugacy, shift equivalence and dimension
group of the circle, Retraction and application, van Kampen theorem
groups, zeta functions.
and application. Universal cover and classification of covering spaces.
Deck transformation and group actions. Simplicial and Singular
MTL752 Data Structures for Applied Mathematics homology, homotopy invariance, exact sequences- Mayer-Vietories
4 Credits (3-0-2) Sequences, the equivalence of simplicial and singular homology.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL 505 Computer Programming
MTL760 Advanced Algorithms
Overlaps with: COL 106 (60%), COL 351 (20%), COL 702 3 Credits (3-0-0)
(30%)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL342
Course Contents: Review of some concepts of C-programming
Overlaps with: COL758
languages such as Array, structures, pointers, linked list; Growth rate
of Functions: Big Oh, small oh, Big Omega, small omega and theta MST: Fibonacci Heaps and O(m log log n) time implementation of
notations; Data structures: stacks, queues, Binary Search trees, MST, Linear time MST verification Algorithm, A linear time randomized
Balanced Binary Trees: AVL trees; Binary Heaps; Data structures for algorithm for MST,Finding min-cost arborescences; Dynamic Graph
representing graphs: Adjacency matrix and Adjacency lists; Sorting: Algorithms; Review of NP-completeness; Introduction to NP-
merge, quick, radix, selection, bucket sort, and heap sort; Graph hard optimization problems; A brief introduction to LPP; Integer
Algorithms: Breadth first search, Depth first search; Dijkstra’s shortest Programming Problem; Primal-Dual Algorithm; Approximation
path algorithm, Prim’s and Kruskal’s MST algorithms; Introduction Algorithms: Primal-Dual Approximation Scheme; vertex cover, set
to Algorithm Design Techniques: Greedy, Divide and Conquer, and cover, TSP; Hardness of Approximation; Introduction to Randomized
Dynamic Programming Technique. Algorithms; Some basic Randomized algorithms; Probabilistic Method:
Lovasz Local Lemma.
MTL754 principles of Computer Graphics
MTL761 Basic Ergodic Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: COL781, ELL792
Measure spaces, Haar Measure, Poincare Recurrence Theorem,
Overview of Graphics Systems; Raster Graphics: line and circle
Hopf’s Maximal Ergodic Theorem, Birkhoff’s Ergodic Theorem, von
drawing algorithms, Windowing and clipping: Cohen - Sutherland line
Neumann’s Ergodic Theorem, Isomorphism, Conjugacy and Spectral
clipping, Cyrus beck clipping method, Polygon Clipping; 2D and 3D
Isomorphism, Entropy, Topological Pressure and its relationship with
Geometrical Transformations: scaling, translation, rotation, reflection;
Invariant Measures.
3D Object representation: Curves and Surfaces: cubic splines, Bezier
curves B-splines, surface of revolution, sweep surfaces;, viewing
MTL762 probability Theory
Transformations: parallel and perspective projection; Hidden line/
surface removal methods; illuminations model; shading: Gouraud, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Phong; Introduction to Ray-tracing; Programming practices with Axiomatic definition of a probability measure, examples, properties
standard graphics libraries like open GL. of the probability measure, finite probability space, conditional
273

Mathematics Courses of Study 2024-2025
probability and Bayes formula, countable probability space, general activity digraph and critical path; Eulerian Graphs: Definition and
probability space. Characterization; Hamiltonian Graphs: Necessary and sufficient
Random variables, examples, sigma-field generated by a random conditions, Planar Graphs: properties, dual, genus of a graph; Graph
variable, tail sigma-field, probability space on R induced by a random Coloring: vertex coloring, chromatic polynomials, edge coloring, planar
variable. graph coloring; Matching and Factorizations: maximum matching
Independent events, sigma-fields and random variables, Borel 0-1 in bipartite graphs, maximum matching in general graphs, Hall’s
criteria, Kolmogorov 0-1 criteria. marriage theorem, factorization; Networks: The Max-flow min-cut
theorem, connectivity and edge connectivity, Menger’s theorem; Graph
Distribution - definition and examples, properties, characterization,
and Matrices.
Jordan decomposition theorem, discrete, continuous and mixed
random variables, standard discrete and continuous distributions,
MTL773 Wavelets and Applications
convolution of distributions.
Two dimension random variables, joint distributions, marginal 3 Credits (3-0-0)
distributions, operations on random variables and their corresponding Pre-requisite(s): MTL411/MTL602
distributions, multidimensional random variables and their
Basic Fourier Analysis: Fourier Series, convergence of Fourier series,
distributions.
Riesz Fischer theorem, Fourier transform of square integrable
Expectation of a random variable, expectation of a discrete and functions, Plancheral formula, Poisson Summation formula, Shannon
a continuous random variable, moments and moment generating sampling theorem, Heisenberg Uncertainty principle. Continuous
function, correlation, covariance and regression. Wavelet transform, Plancherel formula, Inversion formulas. Frames,
Various modes of convergence, Weak law of large numbers, strong Riesz Systems, discrete wavelet transform, Numerical algorithms.
law of large numbers. Orthogonal bases of wavelets, multi resolution analysis, smoothness
Convergence in distribution, weak convergence of generalized of wavelets, compactly supported wavelets, cardinal spline
distributions, Helly-Bray theorems, Scheffe’s theorem. wavelets. Tensor products of wavelets, Decomposition and
Characteristic function – definition and examples, properties, reconstruction algorithms for wavelets, wavelet packets, recent
uniqueness and inversion theorems, moments using characteristic development and applications.
function, Paul Levy’s continuity property of characteristic functions,
characterization of independent random variables. MTL776 Graph Algorithms
Central limit theorem – Liapunov’s and Lindberg’s condition, 3 credits (3-0-0)
Lindeberg-Levy form.
Pre-requisites: COL106
Infinite divisibility, Levy-Khintchine theorem.
Overlaps with: MTL768, COL751
MTL763 Introduction to Game Theory Introduction to Graphs: Definition and basic concepts, Efficient
representations of Graphs; Graph Searching: DFS and BFS; Application
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of Graph Searching: finding connected components, bi-connected
Game Trees, Choice Functions and Strategies, Choice Subtrees, components, testing for bipartiteness, finding cycle in graphs;
Equilibrium N-tuples Strategies, Normal Forms, Non-cooperative Trees: Different MST algorithms, enumeration of all spanning trees
games, Nash Equilibrium and its computation, The von Neumann of a graph; Paths and Distance in Graphs: Single source shortest
Minimax Theorem, Mixed strategies, Best Response Strategies, Matrix path problem, All pairs shortest path problem, center and median
Games and Linear Programming, Simplex Algorithm, Avoiding cycles of a graph, activity digraph and critical path; Hamiltonian Graphs:
and Achieving Feasibility, Dual-Simplex Algorithm, Duality Theorem, sufficient conditions for Hamiltonian graphs, traveling Salesman
2x2 Bimatrix Games, Nonlinear Programming Methods for Non-zero problem; Eulerian Graphs: characterization of Eulerian graphs,
Sum Two-Person Games, Coalitions and Characteristic Functions, construction of Eulerian tour, The Chinese Postman problem; Planar
Imputations and their Dominance, The Core of a game, Strategic Graphs: properties of planar graphs, planarity testing algorithm; Graph
Equivalence, Stable Sets of Imputations, Shapley Values, N-Person Coloring: vertex coloring, chromatic polynomials, edge coloring, planar
Non-Zero Sum Games with continuum of strategies – Duels, Auctions, graph coloring; Matching: maximum matching in bipartite graphs,
Nash Model with Security Point, Threats, Evolution, Stable Strategies, maximum matching in general graphs; Networks: The Max-flow
Population Games, Bayesian Games. min-cut theorem, max-flow algorithm; NP-Complete Graph problems;
Approximation algorithms for some NP-Hard graph problems;
MTL766 Multivariate Statistical Methods Algorithms for some NP-Hard graph problems on special graph classes.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTL780 parameterized Algorithms for Np-hard
Pre-requisite(s): MTL390/MTL601
problems
Introduction to Multivariate data, Geometry of a sample, Mean and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Covariance, Generalized Variance; Sample value of Linear combination
of variables; Multivariate Normal Distribution, and its properties, Pre-requisite(s): MTL342 or COL351 or equivalent
Sampling from a Multivariate Normal population, Sampling distribution Review of NP-completeness and reductions. Introduction to
and Large sample Behaviour of Mean and Covariance, Inference parameterized complexity, parameterized algorithms through
about Mean Vector, Hotelling’s T-square and Likelihood Ratio test, bounded search trees, iterative compression, randomized methods
Confidence Region , Comparison of several Multivariate Populations, in parameterized algorithms, dynamic programming over subsets,
Multivariate Linear Regression Models, Inferences about regression treewidth and parameterized algorithms for bounded treewidth graphs,
models and parameters, Model checking, Principal Component algebraic techniques in parameterized complexity, Matroids and
Analysis, Introduction to Factor Analysis, Orthogonal Factor Models, representative sets, lower bounds for parameterized algorithms based on
Factor Rotation, Strategy for Factor Analysis; Canonical Correlation Exponential Time Hypothesis and Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis.
Analysis, Interpreting population by Canonical variables, Large
Sample Inferences. MTL781 Finite Element Theory and Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTL768 Graph Theory
Pre-requisite(s): MTL107/MTL509 and MTL411/MTL602
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Variational formulation of elliptic boundary value problems; Lax
Overlaps with: MTL776
Milgram Lemma; Existence and uniqueness of solutions; equivalence
Introduction to Graphs: Definition and basic concepts; Trees: of Galerkin and Ritz variational formulations; Triangulation of
characterizations, counting of minimum spanning tree; Paths and ordinary domains-rectangles, polygons, circles, ellipses, etc. Finite
Distance in Graphs: Basic Definitions, center and median of a graph, element problems; conforming and non-conforming methods, Ce’a’s
274

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
Lemma, Interpolation on simplexes in Rn, different Lagrange and problems. Mountain Pass lemma and applications. Hardy’s inequalities
Hermite finite elements, Affine, isoparametric, sub-parametric, and their relation with Elliptic equations. Linear Evolution equations:
super parametric finite elements; Triangulation using isoparametric Second order parabolic equations, existence and regularity of weak
mapping; approximation of boundary; Numerical Integration, solutions, Maximum principles. Semi-group Theory: Generating,
construction of element stiffness matrices and assembly into contraction semi-groups and applications.
global stiffness matrix, Skyline method of solution of finite element
equations; Solution of model problems and computer implementation MTL793 Numerical Methods for Hyperbolic pDEs
procedures; Asymptotic error estimate results; Eigenvalue problems
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of Laplace operator.
Scalar conservation laws: Method of characteristics, Shocks,
Rarefactions, weak and entropy solutions, existence and uniqueness
MTL782 Data Mining
results, Finite volume schemes, Riemann solvers, Convergence of first
4 Credits (3-0-2) order schemes. Higher-order schemes: Lax-Wendroff, TVD schemes,
Limiters, ENO schemes, Higher order Runge-Kutta methods. Linear
Pre-requisite(s): MTL342
systems: Exact solutions, First- and higher-order finite volume
Introduction to Data Mining, Data Cleaning and transformation,Data
schemes. Non-linear Systems: Solutions of Riemann problems, First-
synchronization with operational databases, Association rule mining,
Order finite volume schemes for systems. Higher-order schemes
Sequence analysis, mining complex data, Classification, knowledge
for systems: TVD Limiters. Finite-volume schemes on unstructured
Extraction and prediction, LIFT charts and ROC curves, Bagging
meshes. Hyperbolic systems with source term.
and Boosting, Clustering techniques and application, Parallel and
distributed data mining systems, data cubes and other visualizations.
MTL794 Advanced probability Theory
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTL783 Theory of Computation
Notions of Stochastic Convergence and Related Convergence
3 credits (3-0-0)
Theorems, Uniform Integrability, Weak and Strong Laws of Large
Pre-requisite(s): MTL342 Numbers, Speed of Convergence in the Strong Laws of Large
Numbers, Martingales, Processes, Filtrations, Stopping Times,
Overlaps with: COL352
Discrete Stochastic Integral, Martingale Convergence Theorems and
Introduction to the Theory of Computation: Proof Techniques, Basic
Their Applications, Levy’s Continuity Theorem and Various Versions
concepts of language, Grammar and Automata; Chomsky Hierarchy,
of Central Limit Theorem, Markov Chains, Discrete Markov Chains,
Regular Languages, Finite automata, Equivalence, DFA and NFA,
Convergence of Markov Chains, Applications of Probability Theory to
Minimization, Myhill-Nerode Theorem; Context Free Grammar,
Fourier Series-Examples.
Pushdown Automata their equivalenece and Application, Properties of
Context-Free Languages; Turing Machine, Recursive and Recursively
MTL795 Numerical Method for partial Differential
Enumerable Languages; Undecidability, Rice’s Theorem, Post’s
Equations
Correspondence Problem, Complexity Theory, Intractable Problems.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
MTL785 Natural Language processing Two point boundary value problem: Variational approach,
Discretization and convergence of numerical schemes. Second
3 Credits (3-0-0)
order Elliptic boundary value problem, Variational formulation and
Overlaps with: COL772 Boundary conditions, Finite element Methods, Galerkin Discretization,
Linguistic Essentials: Parts of speech and morphology, inflectional Implementation, Finite difference and Finite volume methods,
versus derivational morphology, Phrase structure and link grammar, Convergence and Accuracy.
Syntax and syntactic theory, Semantics - semantic annotations, Parabolic initial value problems, Heat equations, variational
semantic similarity, Syntactic and semantic Ambiguity, Anaphora and formulation, Method of lines, Convergence.
cataphora - resolution. Study of Words: Frequency N-grams, Word Wave Equations, Method of lines, Timestepping.
alignment in parallel corpora - length based, word based, cognate
based, Word Sense Disambiguation - Supervised, unsupervised MTL796 Stochastic Differential Equations and Its
Techniques, Grammar: Markov Models, POS tagging, Context Free
Applications
Grammar, Parsing - Example-based parsing, Study of Divergence,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Applications: Machine Translation - Example Based, Rule Based,
Statistical, Summarization - Word Space Model, Random Indexing, Mathematical construction of Brownian motion and its essential
Multi Document summarization, Information Retireval - vector based, properties, Derivation of Itô-integrals and Itô calculus, Weak and
term distribution based, Sentiment Analysis. strong solution concepts of SDEs, existence and uniqueness theorems
for SDEs, Basic properties of Itô diffusions e.g., Markov, strong Markov
MTV791 Special Module in Dynamical System property, The generator of a diffusion processes, Dynkin’s formula;
Applications to boundary value problem (Kolmogorov’s Backward
1 Credit (1-0-0)
equation, Feynman-Kac-formula), Optimal stopping (Optimal
Basics - minimality, equicontinuity, recurrence, distality. Interplay of
stopping problems involving an integral, Connection with variational
dynamical properties. Ergodicity. Symbolic dynamics. Relations arising
inequalities), Control theory (Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equation,
from dynamical transformations and their Ellis semigroups. Entropy.
Stochastic control problem with terminal conditions, Existence of
Structure theorems. Decomposition theorems.
optimal control, Stochastic maximum principle) and Mathematical
finance (Option pricing).
MTL792 Modern Methods in Partial Differential equations
3 Credits (3-0-0) MTL797 Computational Methods for Finance
Pre-requisite(s): MTL411/MTL602 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of Lebesgue integration and Classical function spaces, Spaces Risk Neutral probability. Review of option pricing. Deterministic, local
of infinitely differentiable functions and Holder spaces. Sobolev and stochastic volatility models. Pricing characteristic of European,
spaces: L^p spaces, Weak derivatives, Sobolev spaces, approximation American and other options. Introduction to Finite difference
to identity, approximation with smooth functions, trace spaces, methods. Finite Difference methods for European option pricing. Finite
Sobolev and Poincare inequalities, compact embeddings and negative Difference methods for Asian, American and Barrier type contracts.
order Sobolev spaces. Second order elliptic equations: Weak solutions, Introduction to Advanced Numerical Methods, Advanced Numerical
Lax-Milgram Theorem, Energy estimates, Fredlhom-alternative, methods for European, American and other contracts. Pricing under
Regularity of weak solutions, Maximum principles and eigenvalue local and stochastic volatility in Black-Scholes markets.
275

Mathematics Courses of Study 2024-2025
MTL799 Mathematical Analysis in Learning Theory Householder’s methods for symmetric matrices, Rutishauser method
3 Credits (3-0-0) for general matrices, Power and inverse power methods. Interpolation
and approximation : Newton’s, Lagrange and Hermite interpolating
Pre-requisite(s): 90 Credits at the UG level polynomials, cubic splines; least square and minimax approximations.
Review: Normed linear space, Banach space, Hilbert space,
Numerical differentiation and integration: Newton-Cotes and Gaussian
Orthonormal basis, Projection theorem, Dual spaces, Riesz
type quadrature methods.
representation theorem, Bounded linear operations, compact
Ordinary Differential Equations : Initial value problems: single step
operators, Spectral theorem for self-adjoint compact operators.
and multistep methods, stability and their convergence. Boundary
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS), Positive definite functions,
value problems: Shooting and difference methods.
Feature maps, Gaussian Kernel and their RKHSs, Mercer’s theorem,
The elements of statistical learning theory, Probabilistic inequalities, Partial Differential Equations : Difference methods for solution
Tikhonov-type regularization, General regularization in Hilbert of parabolic and hyperbolic equations in one and two-space
space, Representer theorem, Convergence analysis of empirical risk dimensions, stability and their convergence, difference methods for
minimization, Adaptive regularization parameter choice rules. elliptic equations.
Approximation by trigonometric polynomials, Localized kernel
approximations, Neural Networks, RBF neural networks, universal MTL854 Interpolation and Approximation
approximation, Convergence analysis of neural networks, Analysis 3 Credits (3-0-0)
of Deep vs Shallow, University of deep convolution neural networks, Interpolation : general problem, representation theorems, remainder
Generative adversarial nets and convergence analysis. theory, convergence of interpolatory processes. Approximation : best,
uniform and least-squares, degree of approximation. Approximation
MTL843 Mathematical Modeling of Credit Risk of linear functionals : Optimal approximations in Hilbert spaces,
3 Credits (3-0-0) roots and extremals : Convergence of Newton’s method in Banach
spaces, minimizing functionals on normed linear spaces, applications
Pre-requisite(s): MTL106/MTL601 to integral equations and control theory.
Review of elementary stochastic calculus and Black - Scholes - Splines : applications to computer-aided design.
Merton theory of option pricing. Corporate liabilities and contingent
Filters : linear, least-squares and Chebyshev.
claims. Risk structure of interest rates. Statistical techniques for
analyzing defaults. Credit scoring modeling using logistic regression, Applications to signal processing.
Discriminant Analysis and support vector machines. Rating based term
structure models. Credit risk and interest rate swaps. Credit default MTL855 Multiple Decision procedures in Ranking and
swaps (CDS), collateralized debt obligations (CDO’s) and other related Selection
products. The copula approach. Portfolio Credit risk analysis using
3 Credits (3-0-0)
coherant risk measures.
The problem of ranking and selection, different approaches to the
solution of problem. Indifference zone formulation : Ranking normal
MTL 850 Abstract Harmonic Analysis
population in terms of means single and two stage procedures.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Ranking normal population in terms of variances. Ranking binomial
Fourier transform of L1 functions on Rn, Fourier- Stieltjes transform, population-fixed sample size and multistage procedures, play
Plancherel theorem, convolution on L1 on Rn, Fourier series of the winner rules and vector at a time sampling. Ranking Gamma
L1 functions on Tn, Fourier- Stieltjes series, Plancherel theorem, population with largest (smallest) scale parameter. Optimal properties
convolution on L1 on Tn. of fixed subset size proceduresBayes, minimax and admissibilities
Banach algebras, spectrum of an element and its properties, spectral properties, subset selection formulation : Decision theoretical
radius, ideals in a commutative Banach algebra, spectrum of a formulation, best invariant rules. Restricted subset selection. Subset
commutative Banach algebra, Gelfand transform, Gelfand-Naimark selection of normal population w.r.t. means and variances, selection
theorem. of t-best. Subset selection in binomial and gamma populations.
Comparison of population with a control. Normal and exponential
Topological groups and its properties, Haar measure on a locally
populations.
compact group, existence and uniqueness, modulator function,
convolution, homogeneous spaces, existence of an invariant
MTL856 Lie Algebras
measure, weil’s formula.
Unitary representation of locally compact groups, Schur’s lemma, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
relation between unitary representation of groups and the Overlaps with: MTL756
*-representations of the group algebra, positive definite functions,
Definitions and examples. Basic concepts. Solvable and Nilpotent
Gelfand-Raikov theorem.
Lie algebras, The Engel’s theorem, Lie’s theorem, Cartan’s criterion,
Harmonic analysis of LCA groups: Dual group of locally compact Killing form, Finite dimensional semi-simple Lie algebras and their
abelian group, dual group as a locally compact abelian group, representation theory. The Weyl’s theorem. Representations of sl
Pontriagin duality theorem, spectrum of the L1 space w.r.t. the (2,C). Root space decomposition. Rationality properties. Root systems,
convolution, Fourier analysis on locally compact abelian groups, The Weyl group. Isomorphism and conjugacy theorems (Cartan
Plancherel theorem, Bochner’s theorem. subalgebras, Borel subalgebras). Universal enveloping algebras, PBW
Harmonic analysis on compact groups: Finite dimensionality of the theorem, Serre’s theorem. Representation theory and characters.
irreducible unitary representations of a compact group, Schur’s Formulas of Weyl, Kostant and Steinberg. Introduction to infinite
orthogonality relations, Peter-Weyl thereom, Fourier analysis on dimensional Lie algebras.
compact groups, Plancherel theorem, representations of SU(2)
and SO(3). MTL860 Linear Algebra
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MTL851 Applied Numerical Analysis
Vector spaces, linear transformations, Eigenvalues and eigenvectors,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Diagonalization, Simultaneous triangulation and diagonalization.
Error analysis and stability of algorithms. Nonlinear equations: Newton The primary decomposition theorem. Cyclic decomposition and
Raphson method, Muller’s method, criterion for acceptance of a the rational and Jordan canonical forms. Computation of invariant
root, system of non-linear equations. Roots of polynomial equations. factors. Inner product spaces, unitary operators, spectral theorem
Linear system of algebraic equations : Gauss elimination method, for normal operators, polar decomposition. Bilinear and quadratic
LU-decomposition method; matrix inversion, iterative methods, forms, Symmetric and Skew-symmetric bilinear forms. Non-negative
ill- conditioned systems. Eigenvalue problems : Jacobi, Given’s and matrices, Perron-Frobenius theory, generalized inverse of a matrix.
276

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mathematics
MTL863 Algebraic Number Theory and implicit function theorems, Direct methods of Calculus of
3 Credits (3-0-0) variations and applications.
Algebraic number fields, cyclotomic fields, quadratic and cubic MTL883 physical Fluid Mechanics
fields, integral extensions, conjugate elements and conjugate fields,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
norms and traces. The discriminant. Noetherian rings and Dedekind
domains. Finiteness of the class group. Dirichlet’s unit theorem and Description of principles of flow phenomena : pipe and channel flow
its applications. laminar flow, transition, turbulance; flow past an object; boundary
layer, wake, separation, vortices, drag, convection in horizontal
MTL874 Analysis layers, transition from periodic to chaotic behaviour; equations of
motion; dynamical scaling, sample viscous flows; inviscid flows. Flow
3 Credits (3-0-0)
in rotating fluids; hydrodynamic stability.
Review of Banach and Hilbert spaces. The Hahn-Banach, Open
mapping and Banach-Steinhaus theorems. The Riesz representation MTL888 Boundary Elements Methods with Computer
theorem, the spaces Lp(0,1) and L2(0,1) Spectral theory and Sturm- Implementation
Liouville systems, fixed point theory. The theorems by Banach,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Browder and Schauder and applications. Picard’s theorem. Integral
Distributions and Sobolev spaces of fractional order. Elliptic boundary
equation of Fredholm, Volterra and Hammerstein. Nonlinear operators:
value problems on unbounded domains in IRn (n=2,3).
The complementarity problem and its uses. Banach algebras and C*
algebras. Best approximation in normed linear spaces. Fundamental solution of elliptic equations.
Simple layer and double layer potentials Fredholm integral equations
MTL882 Applied Analysis of first and second kinds. Singular and hypersingular kernels.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Interior and exterior Dirichlet problems and integral representations
of their solutions.
Review of Normed Linear spaces, Banach spaces and Hilbert spaces.
Weak and weak* convergence, Spectrum of Bounded Linear operators. Variational formulation of problems defined on boundary. Solution of
some model problems by boundary element methods, approximate
Browder and Schauder fixed point theorems and applications to
Differential and integral equations, LP spaces. integrations over boundary, solution methods of algebraic
equations; computer implementation of boundary element methods
Distributions and Fourier transforms: Schwartz space, tempered
for a model problem. Coupling of boundary element and finite
distributions, Fourier transform of tempered distributions, Fourier
element methods.
transform of LP functions and applications.
Some advanced topics of boundary integral methods integrals with
Sobolev spaces: Density, embedding and extension theorems. hypersingular kernel, a method of elimination of singularity, Lagrange
Differential Calculus: Derivatives of maps on Banach spaces, inverse multiplier method.
277

Department of Mechanical Engineering
MCp100 Introduction to Engineering Visualization gear trains including compound epicyclic gears. Design of flywheel
2 Credits (0-0-4) and governors. Inertia forces and their balancing for rotating and
reciprocating machines.
Sketching of engineering objects and interpretation of drawings as
Free and forced vibration of SDOF system. Introduction to 2 DOF
a visualisation and communication tool. Creating 3D components
systems, vibration absorbers.
through the use of a CAD package. Simple assemblies, generation of
assembly views from part drawings, animation of simple assemblies.
MCL131 Manufacturing processes-I
MCp101 product Realization through Manufacturing 3 Credits (3-0-0)
2 Credits (0-0-4) Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
Exposing role of manufacturing processes in product realization; Overlaps with: With three core courses of ME2 (30% each)
Understanding product realization by endeavouring hands on activities;
CASTING: Sand casting, Gating system and its design, Riser design
Experience of product realization by undertaking manufacturing
and its placement, Melting, Pouring and Fluidity, Solidification of pure
exercises and assembly activity in teams.
metals and alloys, Casting defects, Inspection and testing. Other
casting processes, advantages and applications.
MCL104 Solid Mechanics
WELDING: Shielded metal arc welding, other arc welding processes
4 Credits (3-1-0) like TIG, MIG and SAW processes, Types of metal transfer in arc
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 welding, Gas welding and Gas cutting, Resistance welding, Solid
state welding processes, Brazing, Soldering and their applications,
Overlaps: APL104, APL105, APL108
Surfacing and its applications.
Introduction and brief history, State of stress at a point, principal FORMING: Plastic deformation of metals, stress-strain relationships,
stress, maximum shear stress. Concept of strain, strain displacement Yield criteria, Hot working and Cold working, Friction and lubrication
relations, compatibility conditions, principal strains, transformation in metal working, Analysis of bulk forming and sheet metal forming
of stresses and strains, state of plane stress/strain, Mohr's circle. processes. Unconventional forming processes.
Constitutive relations, uniaxial tension test, stress-strain diagrams,
Powder : Powder production methods, compaction and sintering.
isotropic linear elastic, elasto-plastic and viscoelastic materials.
Applications of powder metallurgy.
Energy Methods.
Uniaxial stress and strain analysis of bars, thermal stresses, Torsion, MCL132 Metal Forming and press Tools
Bending of beams, shear stresses in beams, deflection of beams, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
stability of equilibrium configuration.
Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
MCL106 Fluid Mechanics Overlaps with: 30% with MCL131
4 Credits (3-1-0) Mechanical behaviour of metals and alloys in plastic deformation,
Stress-strain relationships, Yield criteria, Fundamentals of plasticity,
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
Tensile properties, Flow stress and flow curves, Fundamentals of
Overlaps: APL105, APL106, APL107 metal forming processes, Strain rate and temperature in metal
Introduction: scope, methods of analysis (system vs. volume), working, Hot working, Cold working and annealing, Analysis of forming
Fluid as a continuum, Eulerian/Lagrangian description, Newton's processes like forging, rolling, extrusion, wire drawing and sheet metal
law of viscosity. forming by slab method, Equipment and tools used in metal forming
Fluid Statics: Hydrostatic force on submerged surfaces, Buoyancy operations, Types of presses, different types of dies and their design
and stability, Fluids aspects, Unconventional forming processes.
in rigid-body motion.
MCL133 Near Net Shape Manufacturing
Flow kinematics: Flow lines, vorticity and circulation.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Integral flow analysis: Reynolds transport theorem, conservation or
mass, linear and angular momentum for inertial and accelerating Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
control volumes. conservation of energy, Bernoulli's equation. Introduction and fundamentals of Casting of complicated shapes:
Differential analysis of fluid motion: Conservation of mass. automotive components, casting of light alloys – Aluminum,
stream function for 2D incompressible flow, fluid translation, Magnesium and Titanium alloys.
rotation and deformation, conservation of momentum, Navier-Stokes Injection moulding: Thermoplastics, thermoset plastics and
equations, incompressible inviscid flows, potential flow. composites – processing methodologies.
Dimensional analysis and similitude: Dimensionless groups, Powder Metallurgy: fabrication routes, powder size determination
scaling, non-dimensionalization. – micro and nano level, powder consolidation routes, compacting,
Viscous flows: fully developed laminar and turbulent pipe flows, sintering, hot pressing, sintering, hot iso static pressing, field assisted
head loss, boundary sintering technologies.
layer concept, flow separation, comparison of laminar and turbulent Advances in near net shape manufacturing: Metal Injection moulding,
velocity profiles, Laser engineered net shaping.
streamlining and implications.
MCL134 Metrology and Quality Assurance
Compressible flow: speed of sound, the Mach cone, stagnation
properties. critical 3.5 Credits (3-0-1)
conditions, isentropic flows and converging-diverging nozzles. Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
Overlaps with: MCL231
MCL111 Kinematics and Dynamics of Machines
Introduction to Metrology and its relevance, standardization,
4 Credits (3-0-2)
dimensional measurement, limits, fits and tolerances, limit gauging,
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 linear and angular measurements and their applications, surface
Kinematic pairs, Kinematic diagram and inversions. Mobility and roughness-quantification & measurement, Feature Inspection, Online
range of movements. Displacement, velocity and acceleration analysis inspection, Calibration.
of planar linkages, graphical and analytical methods. Dimensional Introduction to Quality Assurance and Quality Control, Various elements
synthesis for motion, function and path generation. Force analysis of in Quality Assurance, On-line and Off-line quality control, Statistical
planar mechanisms. Cam profile synthesis, graphical and analytical concepts in quality, Central limit theorem, Quality Characteristics,
method. Gear tooth profile, interference in gears. Gear types, QC Tools. Process capability studies, Remedial / Corrective actions.
278

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
Design of sampling plans, Economics of product inspection, Quality properties of a pure substance – saturated and other states. Work
costs, Problems and illustrations in Quality Assurance. and heat – definition and applications. 1st Law – internal energy and
enthalpy, applications to non-flow/closed and flow/open systems
MCL135 Welding and Allied processes (SSSF and USUF). 2nd Law – corollaries, Clausius inequality, entropy.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Carnot cycle. Basics of gas-vapor mixtures. Vapor power cycles –
Rankine cycle and its modifications. Steam generation and its use
Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
– power plants, co-generation, combined cycles. Introduction to
Principles of arc welding, basic physics of arc and flame, Gas welding various equipment in thermal power plant.
and Gas cutting, manual metal arc welding, GTAW, GMAW. Metal Introduction to transport phenomena: various modes of transport of
transfer mechanisms in arc welding, Weld bead characterization, momentum and energy - diffusion and advective transport. Modes
Electrogas and electroslag welding, Resistance welding, Heat flow of heat transfer in various applications. Conduction: Heat diffusion
characteristics and metallurgical changes in fusion welding, Solid equation, 1-D steady state conduction in extended surfaces, infinite
state welding processes, Radiant energy welding processes, Brazing, and semi-infinite walls, heat generation, lumped capacitance.
Soldering and their applications, Joint design, welding symbols and Convection: Forced and free convection - mass, momentum
Joint evaluation through destructive and non destructive testing and energy conservation equations, non-dimensional numbers,
methods, welding defects, causes and remedies, residual stress hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers, basics of heat transfer
and distortion. Plasma cutting, surfacing and plasma spray forming, in external and internal laminar and turbulent flows, and use of co-
surfacing applications. Advances in welding. relations. Radiation: properties, Laws, 3-surface network for diffuse-
gray surfaces. Familiarization with heat exchangers. Application area
MCL136 Material Removal processes
example: cooling of electronics.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCL201 Mechanical Engineering Drawing
Pre-requisite(s): MCP101
Introduction to various material removal processes, Nomenclature 3.5 Credits (2-0-3)
and geometry of cutting tools, Mechanics of Conventional and Pre-requisite(s): MCP100
Non Conventional Machining including force, temperature, surface
Introduction to generation of drawings as a design process for
integrity. Methods of measurement of forces, temperature and surface
machine assembly. Use of datum planes to locate features and
finish (experimentally and analytically), Tool wear mechanisms and
machine elements uniquely in assemblies.
tool life criteria, Basic concepts of cost and economics of machining.
Sectioning, dimensioning, notes and version control in drawings.
Various types of machine tools and their structures, Workholding and
Standardized representation of threads, fasteners, welds, bearings,
tool holding devices for machine tools.
springs and related components.
Ultraprecision machining and grinding methods and the machine tools
Introduction to limits, fits and tolerances, dimensional and geometric
used for such processes. Manufacturing of micro tools, Nano-finishing
tolerances, surface finish symbols.
of materials using advanced machining methods.
Generation of assembly drawings including sectioning and bill of
MCL140 Engineering Thermodynamics materials.
Evolving details of components from assembly considerations.
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Detailing of components involving shafts, bearing, pulleys, gears,
Introduction: microscopic and macroscopic points of view. Basic
belts, brackets for assembly.
concepts and definitions – system, boundary, equilibrium, steady
Solid modeling of above assembly and incorporating assembly
state, zeroth law, temperature scale. Work and heat – definition
constraints for animation of motion of machine assemblies.
and applications; various forms of work. Thermodynamic properties
of a pure substance – saturated and other states, real gases,
MCL211 Design of Machines
compressibility chart. The First Law of Thermodynamics for
control mass / volume, Internal Energy, Enthalpy, The SSSF and 4 Credits (3-0-2)
USUF Processes. Second Law – corollaries, Carnot cycle. Clausius Pre-requisite(s): APL104, MCL100, MCL201
inequality, entropy. Irreversibility and exergy analysis. Thermodynamic
Conceptualization of a machine in terms of geometrical requirements
Relations. Vapor power cycles – Rankine cycle and its modifications.
specified in terms of functional degrees of freedom, degrees of
Brayton / Otto / Dual cycles. Vapor compression refrigeration cycle.
constraints and stiffness. Synthesis of an assembly from machine
Thermodynamics of non-reacting mixtures, psychrometry.
components to meet the functional requirements. Sizing machine
components and selecting material through use of free body
MCL141 Thermal Science for Manufacturing
diagrams, failure theories in static and repeated loading. Design
4 Credits (3-1-0) and selection of certain machine elements (i.e. cams, gears, belt-
Overlaps with: MCL140, MCL242 (50%), CLL110 (50%) pulleys, bearings, springs, shaft / axle, plates, nuts and bolts, brake/
clutch) as exemplars. Case studies (like Gearbox driven by motor
Overview and the importance of the knowledge of thermal science in
using belt drive) through use of parametric software to carry out
manufacturing processes. Basics of thermodynamics: closed and open
iteration in the design space.
systems, work and heat. First law of thermodynamics for control mass
and control volume. Second law of thermodynamics. Irreversibilities
MCL212 Control Theory and Applications
and examples of irreversibilities in manufacturing.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Introduction to transport phenomena : various modes of transport
of momentum, energy and mass- diffusion and advective transport. Pre-requisite(s): MTL100, MTL101
Convective heat and mass transfer - Concept of momentum, thermal
Overlaps with: 50-60% with ELL225 and CLL261
and concentration boundary layers; relevant correlations. Radiation
heat transfer. Blackbody radiation. Gray and diffuse surfaces. Introduction; Fourier and Laplace transforms; Mathematical Modeling
Surface radiation. Case studies of manufacturing processes involving of simple physical systems; Transfer function; Block diagrams; Signal
application of the above concepts. flow graph; Transient response analysis using Laplace transform;
Frequency response; Design / performance specifications in time and
MCL142 Thermal Science for Electrical Engineers frequency domain; Steady state error and error constants;
Proportional, integral, derivative, PD and PID control; Sensors and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
actuators for temperature, pressure, flow and motion control systems;
Overlaps with: MCL140, MCL141, CLL121 Realization of standard controllers using hydraulic, pneumatic,
Introduction to applications. Basic concepts and definitions – system, electronic, electro-hydraulic and electro-pneumatic systems; Stability;
boundary, equilibrium, steady state and others. Thermodynamic Routh’s criterion; Nyquist stability criterion, Bode plots; Control system
279

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
design using Root Locus and Frequency response; Lead and lag and 1D transient models, semi-infinite wall. Diffusion mass transfer
compensation; Gain margin, Phase margin; Introduction to Modern in 1D: steady state and transient.
control: State space representation; Control with state feedback; Convection: Forced and free convection - mass, momentum and
Review of applications of control in: Machine tools, Aerospace, Boiler, energy conservation equations, scaling analysis and significance of
Engine Governing, Active vibration control. non-dimensional numbers, thermal boundary layers, heat transfer
in external and internal laminar and turbulent flows, and use of
MCL231 Manufacturing processes-II correlations. Convective mass transfer. Boiling and condensation:
3 Credits (3-0-0) physical phenomena and correlations.
Heat exchanger types and analysis: LMTD and effectiveness-NTU method.
Pre-requisite(s): MCL131
Radiation: properties, Laws, view factor, 3-surface network for diffuse-
Overlaps with: MCL134, MCL136 gray surfaces. Gas radiation.
Introduction to Metal Machining and Machine Tools, Geometry of
cutting tools, Mechanics of Machining including force and temperature MCL261 Introduction to Operations Research
generation, Methods of measurement of forces and temperature
3 Credits (3-0-0)
(experimentally and analytically), Tool wear mechanisms and tool life
criteria, Basic concepts of cost and economics of machining. Pre-requisite(s): MTL108
Various types of machine tools and their development with regard to Introduction to Modeling, Linear Programming - Formulation, Solution
productivity & accuracy requirements, Workholding and tool holding methods including Simplex, Primal-Dual, Integer Programming-
devices for machine tools. Formulation, Solution methods, Introduction to Dynamic Programming,
Introduction to non-conventional machining processes and Software Tools and Case Studies.
understanding basic mechanisms of material removal in such
processes MCp261 Industrial Engineering Laboratory-I
Introduction to metrology, Dimensional Inspection, Inspection by 1 Credit (0-0-2)
measurement, Limit gauging, Design of Limit gauges, Surface quality
Pre-requisite(s): MCL261, MCL262
inspection, Feature inspection.
Deterministic optimization problem formulation, solution using CPLEX,
sensitivity analysis; Conceptualization/Visualization of problem
MCp231 Manufacturing Laboratory-I
situation, formulation of simulation model, simulation runs and
1 Credit (0-0-2) output analysis.
Pre-requisite(s): MCL131
MCL262 Stochastic Modelling and Simulation
Overlaps with: MCP232 (60%)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Experiments on casting, joining, forming, injection molding and
powder metallurgical processes. Pre-requisite(s): MTL108
Overview of Probability Basics, Introduction to Discrete Time
MCp232 production Engineering Laboratory-I Markov Chains (DTMC), Transient and Limiting analysis of DTMC,
1 Credit (0-0-2) Introduction to Continuous Time Markov Chains (CTMC), Transient
and Limiting analysis of DTMC, Applications, Discrete Event Simulation
Pre-requisite(s): MCL132, MCL133, MCL134
- Introduction, Generation of Random Variables, Simulation modeling
Overlaps with: MCP231 (60%) through case studies.
Experiments on casting, forming, injection molding and powder
metallurgical processes. MCp301 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory-I
1.5 Credits (0-0-3)
MCL241 Energy Systems and Technologies
Pre-requisite(s): APL104, APL106, MCL111, MCL140, MCL241
4 Credits (3-0.5-1)
Experiments pertaining to applications of the concepts learnt in
Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 the theory courses of Fluid Mech, Solid Mech, Thermodynamics,
Kinematics and dynamics and Energy Systems.
Overlaps with: ESL714 (>50%)
Energy sources : Fuels : Fossil fuels, Nuclear fuels, Direct Solar, MCL311 CAD and Finite Element Analysis
Indirect solar - Biomass, Ocean, Tidal, Hydro, Wind etc. Energy
4 Credits (3-0-2)
demand / Growth / economics; Fuel upgradation: gasification of coal
and biomass; biogas. Pre-requisite(s): APL104, MCL211
Energy conversion: Direct Conversion: Solar PV, Fuel Cells, Overlaps with: AML705, 706, 710 (course should be mutually
Thermoelectric Conversion. Thermal to electric: IC Engines, Gas and
exclusive w.r.t these courses)
Steam Turbines; Electromechanical conversion; Hydraulic turbines.
Introduction and overview. Need and Scope of Computer Aided
Chemical to Thermal: Combustion and stoichiometry.
Machine Design. Role of Geometric Modelling, FE and Optimization;
Energy utilization : Refrigeration, HVAC, Desalination, Polygeneration;
2D and 3D Geometric transformations and projections. The Viewing
pumps and compressors.
pipeline; Geometric modeling; Modelling of curves, cubics, splines,
Energy storage : Thermal / Mechanical / Electric /Chemical. beziers and b-splines, NURBS; Modeling of surfaces; Modeling of
Environmental Impact : Air/water/soil /nuclear waste. solids–b-rep, CSG, octree, feature based modeling; Introduction to
the Finite Element Method, principle of potential energy; 1D elements,
MCL242 Heat and Mass Transfer Derivation of Stiffness and Mass matrices for a bar, a beam and a
4 Credits (3-1-0) shaft, FEA using 2D and 3D elements; Plain strain and plain stress
problems, plates / shell elements; Importance of Finite element mesh,
Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 & APL106
Automatic meshing techniques; Interfacing with CAD software.
Overlaps with: CLL251 Introduction to Thermal analysis, Dynamic analysis using eigen values,
Modes of heat transfer, energy carriers and continuum approximation. and Non linear analysis; Limitations of FEM.
Mechanisms of mass transfer. Unified view of momentum, heat and
MCL314 Acoustics and Noise Control
mass transfer.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Conduction: Fourier’s law, heat diffusion equation, 1-D steady state
conduction in extended surfaces, heat generation, lumped capacitance Pre-requisite(s): APL100
280

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
Overlaps with: MEL733 (20%), MEL746 (50%), ITL 760 (60%) Ion beam micromachining methods, Mechanical Micromachining
Fundamentals of acoustics, Reflection and transmission of waves, techniques, Nanomanufacturing methods, nanomaterials and nano
Sound sources and generation mechanisms, Human physiological metrology.
response to noise, Sound measurement, Sound in enclosed
spaces, Sound absorption, Acoustic enclosures and barriers, Sound MCp331 Manufacturing Laboratory-II
propagation in ducts, Vibration control, Active noise control, Overview 1 Credit (0-0-2)
of Numerical acoustics.
Pre-requisite(s): for ME1: MCL131, MCL231 for ME2: MCL136
MCL318 Introduction to Orbital Mechanics Experiments on machining and metrology.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCp332 production Engineering Laboratory-II
Pre-requisite(s): APL100
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Kinematics and Dynamics of point Mass: Particle Kinematics
Pre-requisite(s): MCL135, MCL136, MCP232
in Moving Frames, Newton’s Laws, Equations of relative motion,
Numerical Solution of Dynamics Equations; Two Body problem: Experiments on machining and welding processes.
Angular momentum and orbit formulas, Perifocal frame, Lagrange
coefficients, Circular Lagrange points; Restricted Three Body MCL334 Industrial Automation
problem: Lagrange points, Jacobi constant; Orbital position as 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Function of Time: Time since periapsis, Circular, Elliptic, Parabolic,
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101 and APL106 or MCL141
Hyperbolic trajectories; Orbits in 3D: Geocentric frames, Orbital
elements, Coordinate transformations; Orbit Determination: Overlaps with: 5% with MEL312
Ground Trace, Preliminary orbit determination; Orbital Maneuvers: Introduction to Automation technologies, applications around us
Introduction to Impulsive Maneuvers, Hohmann Transfer, Bi-elliptic and in manufacturing. Types of systems - mechanical, electrical,
Hohmann Transfer, Non-Hohmann Transfers, Nonimpulsive orbital electronics; Sensors, Factory Automation Sensors, Electrical sensors,
maneuvers; Relative Motion and Rendezvous: Relative motion in Process Automation Sensors and their interfaces; Hydraulics &
orbit, Clohessy-Wiltshire equations, Relative motion in close proximity Pneumatic Systems and components; Circuit design approach and
circular orbits; Interplanetary Trajectories: Interplanetary examples; Sequence operation of more than two cylinders and
Hohmann transfers, Rendezvous opportunities, Sphere of influence, motors; Electro Pneumatic & Electro Hydraulic Systems, Relay Logic
Method of patched conics, Planetary departure, Planetary rendezvous, circuits, Feedback control systems; Programmable Logic Controllers,
flyby, ephemeris, non-Hohmann trajectories. programming languages & instruction set, ladder logic, functional
blocks, structured text, and applications. Human Machine Interface
MCL321 Automotive Systems
& SCADA; Motion controller, stepper & servo motors, multi axes
4 Credits (3-0-2) coordinated motion, CNC control; RFID technology and its application;
Machine vision and control applications.
Overlaps with: MEL311 (10%),
Laboratory work will be hands-on design and operation of automatic
Review of basic engine management systems, alternative fuel
systems.
systems, fuel ignition systems, hybrid electric vehicles, exhaust
emission systems, drivetrain systems, chassis, environmental
MCL336 Advances in Welding
management and service information systems. Introduction of torque
converters, planetary gears, clutches, differentials, all-wheel drive, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
heating and air conditioning systems, and interaction of tyre and Pre-requisite(s): MCL131 or MCL135
road interface. History of engine technology. Detail of starting and
Introduction to joining technology, General survey and classification
charging systems. Details of steering and suspension systems. Details
of Welding processes, importance of advanced materials and joining
of bearing and lubrication systems.
technologies, welding technologies related to industries: automotive,
aerospace, nuclear, oil and gas industries.
MCL322 power Train Design
3 Credits (3-0-0) MCL337 Advanced Machining processes
Pre-requisite(s): MCL211 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MEL311 (10%) Prerequisites: MCL231 or MCL136
Introduction of components of automotive powertrain system, viz.,
Overlaps with: ~20% overlap with MCL231 and MCL136
engines, transmission, clutches and brakes. Engine characteristics.
Introduction to advanced machining processes – need for such
Throttle system, Turbochargers, History and design of valve train.
processes and application areas.
Design of variable valve timing system, Exhaust gas recirculation.
Materials in powertrain components. Lubrication systems to minimize Mechanical Energy utilized advanced machining processes like
life cycle costs. Modelling and design of gearbox. Role of control ultrasonic machining, abrasive flow machining, magnetic abrasive
system in advanced (i.e. direct injection, active boosting, camless) finishing, magneto-rheological finishing, abrasive water jet
powertrain system. machining–mechanics of cutting, process parametric analysis, process
capabilities, applications.
MCL330 Special Topics production Engineering Thermoelectric based advanced machining processes like electro
3 Credits (3-0-0) discharge machining, wire EDM, Plasma Arc Machining, Laser Beam
Machining, Focussed Ion Beam Machining – working principles,
Pre-requisite(s): To be defined by the course coordinator at
material removal mechanisms, process capabilities and applications.
the time of offering the course if required
Electrochemical and Chemical Advanced Machining – ECG,
Specialized topics in Production Engineering. The detailed contents Electrostream Drilling, Chemical Machining – process characteristics,
will be decided by the faculty who will reach the course.
numerical modelling of the processes, applications and limitations.
MCL331 Micro and Nano Manufacturing
MCL338 Mechatronic Applications in Manufacturing
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): for ME1: MCL131, MCL231 for ME2: MCL136
Pre-requisite(s): ELL101
An overview of micro and nano mechanical systems and their
applications in Mechanical Engineering, MEMS Microfabrication Overlaps with: MEL749, EEL482
methods, Silicon Micromachining methods, Laser, Electron and Introduction to mechatronic systems and components, Review
281

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
of manufacturing and need and integration of mechatronics at MCL345 Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines
different levels, Principles of basic electronics, Digital electronics 4 Credits (3-0-2)
review: number system, gates, flip-flops, counters, registers,
tri-state concept, TTL and CMOS circuits, memories. Embedded Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 or MCL141
electronics, Basics of Microcontroller & Microprocessors architecture Overlaps with: <10% with PG I.C. Engine course
and instruction set, machine cycles, interrupts, instruction set,
Introduction, Engine design and operating parameters, Ideal
memory and I/O interfacing, programming techniques, Timer/
properties, Models of engine processes and cycles, combustion
Counters, Serial Interfacing and communications, Interfacing to
thermodynamics, fuel/air cycle analysis, Spark-Ignition engine
keyboards and displays, Standard busses. Microcontrollers and
combustion, SI and Diesel engine emissions, IC Engines: the future.
their applications, integrated circuits, sensors, actuators, and other
electrical/electronic hardware in mechatronic systems. Microprocessor MCL346 Turbomachinery
based measurement and control: D/A and A/D conversion, data
4 Credits (3-0-2)
acquisition systems, encoders, interfacing of motors and transducers.
Selection of mechatronic components, namely sensors like encoders Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 & APL106
and resolvers. Stepper and servomotors; Solenoid like actuators; Introduction, Euler equation for turbo-machines. Thermodynamics
Transmission elements like Ball screw and Controllers. Analysis of and fluid mechanics of turbo-machinery Mass, momentum and energy.
mechatronic systems with applications to motion control, robotics, Radial equilibrium theory and design of blades for a turbo-machine.
CNC systems, and others. Case studies of applications in process and Design of Hydraulic turbines. Axial flow turbines and compressors:
discrete manufacturing. theory and design. Centrifugal compressors & Pumps. Wind Turbines.
Laboratory work will be hands-on Microcontroller & Microprocessor Micro Turbines.
interfacing and programming, Motion controller, motors, sensors,
and actuators. MCL347 Intermediate Heat Transfer
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCL341 Gas Dynamics and propulsion Pre-requisite(s): MTL100, MTL101, MCL242
4 Credits (3-0-2) Overlaps with: MCL441 (~20%)
Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 & MCL241 Heat conduction: Governing equation, Analytical solution of steady
Revision of fundamentals. Thermodynamics of compressible flow and unsteady 2D heat conduction, Heat transfer from convective
– wave motion in compressible medium, Mach number and cone, radiative fins; Convection: Governing equations, Forced convection
properties. Steady one-dimensional compressible flow through heat transfer, scale analysis, similarity solutions and momentum
variable area ducts. Converging and converging-diverging nozzles integral method for laminar flows, energy integral method for
and diffusers. Effects of heating and friction in duct flow, Rayleigh turbulent flows; Natural convection: similarity solutions and energy
and Fanno lines. Flows with normal shocks. Oblique shocks and integral methods, mixed convection; Heat transfer from pipes:
reflection. Expansion waves. Prandtl-Meyer flow. Flow over bodies. analytical solutions; Heat transfer at high speed; Radiative heat
Measurements and applications. Jet propulsion – types of engines, transfer: blackbody radiation, radiative heat transfer between
propulsion fundamentals. Compressor, combustor and turbines gray, diffusive surfaces, radiative heat exchange between non-gray
construction and performance. Rocket propulsion – basics, solid and surfaces,gas radiation, enclosure theory, governing equation for
liquid propelled engines, parametric studies, construction features, radiatively participating medium. Boiling: pool boiling, development
single and multi-stage rockets. Thrust chamber and nozzle models. of a correlation for nucleate boiling, critical heat flux, flow boiling.
Studies of in-use engines. Environmental aspects. Condensation: film condensation over flat and circular geometries,
Nusselt theory.
MCL343 Introduction to Combustion MCL348 Thermal Management of Electronics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): (MCL140 and MCL242) or MCL141 Pre-requisite(s): APL106 and (MCL242 or MCL141)
Introduction. Fuels: gaseous, liquid and solid. Physical and Electronics packaging and cooling technologies; Heat sinks: principle,
chemical characterizations. Chemical thermodynamics and kinetics. types, modelling, and design; Contact resistance; Heat pipes and two
Conservation equations for multi-component systems. Premixed phase systems: principle, types, modelling and design; Microchannel
systems: laminar flame problems and effects of different variables. heat exchangers: single phase and two phase; Radiative heat transfer
Measurement of flame speed. Flammability limits. Ignition and and importance in space applications; Thermoelectric devices;
quenching. Turbulent premixed flames. Non-premixed systems: Measurement and characterisation techniques; Case studies of
laminar diffusion flamejet, droplet burning. Combustion of solids: thermal management of electronics.
drying, devolatilization and char combustion. Biomass combustion
devices. Coal combustion. Pollution: Main pollutants and their MCL350 Mechanical Engineering product Synthesis
environmental impact. NOx, CO and SOx formation chemistry.
2 Credits (1-0-2)
Particulate pollutants. Emissions from engines, power plants and
industrial applications. Low NOx burners and furnace design. Pre-requisite(s): Product-related core courses, as specified by
the instructor
MCL344 Refrigeration and Air-conditioning Study of product specifications, GA drawings, sub-systems and
component functionalities. Component-wise study of engineering
4 Credits (3-0-2)
design, including, material selection, stress analysis, fluid flow
Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 and APL106 analysis, heat transfer analysis, etc. Implications of geometrical
dimensioning and tolerancing. Materials and manufacturing processes.
Overlaps with: ESL850
Assembly. Wear, performance deterioration and failure. Testing and
Introduction and applications, recapitulation of fundamentals. Vapor
certification. Failure modes and effects analysis. Modifications and
compression systems: Ideal and real cycle analyses, Refrigerants:
their implications. Regulatory requirements. Standards.
designation, desirable properties, environmental considerations.
Advanced vapor compression cycles. Components: condensers, MCL361 Manufacturing System Design
evaporators, compressors and expansion devices – construction,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
operation and performance. Vapor absorption and gas cycle
refrigeration. Psychrometry. Processes - heating, humidification, Pre-requisite(s): MTL108, MCL261
cooling and dehumidification etc. Air-conditioning calculations, Manufacturing strategy, Manufacturing flexibility, Manufacturing
Cooling load estimation. complexity, Investment decisions using life cycle costing, System
282

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
reliability and maintenance models, Economic design of quality Pre-requisite(s): courses as specified by the instructor and EC 50
control plans, Single and mixed model assembly line balancing, Shop Course details shall be announced at the time of offering of the course.
floor scheduling algorithms, Lot sizing and inventory control models, The assessment will be based on a combination of assignments,
Performance modeling of manufacturing systems, Production control quizzes, and term paper and tests.
mechanisms like Kanban, CONWIP and POL2.
MCV390 Refrigeration and Air Conditioning product
MCp361 Industrial Engineering Laboratory-II
Design
1 Credit (0-0-2)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MCP261, MCL361
Pre-requisite(s): Thermodynamics, Heat Transfer, Energy
Design of optimal acceptance sampling plans, Design of optimal
Conversion
control charts, Simulation of process failures, Simulation of machine
failures and Simulation of job shops and production lines with various Develop a context for new product design. The course begins with a
production control mechanisms. fundamental understanding of an ideal system and the opportunities
for improvement in real life systems. Overview of air conditioning
MCL363 Investment planning system components and their selection criteria. Integration of these
3 Credits (3-0-0) components into a product design using case studies of indigenously
developed products for Indian Railways and Telecom industry. The
Pre-requisite(s): MCL261 & MCL262
course will enable students to look at what goes into preparing a
Introduction to investment and rate of return, Markowitz theory comprehensive input for a new design and the process used to validate
and its applications to optimal portfolio management, Introduction the design from prototype to commercial production.
to Bonds, Introduction to Derivatives and Options, Concept of Risk
Neutral Pricing, Single period and multiple period binomial models for MCp401 Mechanical Engineering Laboratory-II
option pricing, Introduction to Black Scholes model and the formula.
2 Credits (0-0-4)
MCL364 Value Engineering Pre-requisite(s): MCL211, MCL212, MCL242, MCP301
4 Credits (3-0-2) The experiments would involve full or partial fabrication of setups
and then taking readings and analysis of its behavior, instead of using
Overlaps with: MEL671
ready made setups. The knowledge gained in control engineering
Introduction to Value Engineering and Value Analysis, Methodology
course would also be used for setting up computerised measurements
of V.E., Quantitative definition of value, Use value and prestige value,
using Data acquisition cards.
Estimation of product quality/performance, Classification of functions,
functional cost and functional worth, Effect of value improvement
MCD411 B.Tech. project-I
on profitability. Introduction to V.E. job plan / Functional approach to
value improvement, Various phases and techniques of the job plan, 4 Credits (0-0-8)
Life Cycle Costing for managing the total value of a product, Cash Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
flow diagrams, Concepts in LCC, Present Value concept, Annuity cost
A broad outline of the contents is as follows and a project may include
concept, Net Present Value, Pay Back period, Internal rate of return on
some or all of these activities:
investment (IRR), Continuous discounting, Examples and illustrations.
Team formation for designing, manufacturing and operating a
Creative thinking and creative judgment, False material, labor and
selected product, formulating project management procedures.
overhead saving, System reliability, Reliability elements in series and
Need identification, assessment of alternative designs, selection
in parallel, Decision Matrix, Evaluation of value alternatives, Estimation
of design for development, defining design and performance
of weights and efficiencies, Sensitivity analysis, Utility transformation
specifications, and testing procedure. Detailed mechanical, thermal
functions, Fast diagramming, Critical path of functions, DARSIRI
and manufacturing-related design of systems, assemblies, sub-
method of value analysis.
assemblies and components culminating in engineering drawings and
material specifications; preparing bill of materials and identification
MCL366 OR Methods in policy and Governance
of standard components and bought-out parts.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Using engineering drawings, the process sheets are developed
Pre-requisite(s): MCL261 based on available materials, machine tools and other fabrication
Mixed Integer Linear Programming, Markov Decision Processes, facilities. Materials and standard components are procured and
Applications of OR techniques to areas such as aviation security, manufacturing is carried out. After inspection, parts are accepted.
resource allocation, energy policy, railways systems, management Assembly procedure is finalized and the machine is assembled.
of natural resources, Public Service Delivery. Acceptance tests are carried out vis-à-vis specifications. Professional
quality documentation of all designs, data, drawings, and results,
MCL368 Quality and Reliability Engineering change history, overall assessment, etc. is mandatory, along with a
final presentation.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MTL108 MCD412 B.Tech. project-II
Process capability analysis, Process quality improvement approaches,
7 Credits (0-0-14)
Economics of quality control, Reliability data analysis, Component and
system reliability models, Reliability test plans, Warranty analysis, Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Maintenance models.
MCL421 Automotive Structural Design
MCL370 Special Topics in Industrial Engineering 3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MCL211, MCL321
Pre-requisite(s): To be defined by the course coordinator at
Overlaps with: MEL736 (40% - Students should be allowed to
the time of offering the course if required
do only one of the two courses)
Specialized topics in Industrial Engineering. The detailed contents
History of automotive design, Design cycle for an Automobile,
will be decided by the faculty who will teach the course.
Styling, Loads on the chassis, Chassis and structural Design for static
loads, Dynamic and impact loads, Energy absorption in the vehicle,
MCL380 Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering
Designing for NVH, Designing the suspension system, Designing the
3 Credits (3-0-0) brake system.
283

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
MCL422 Design of Brake Systems voltage relationship, polarization and losses, charge transfer kinetics,
3 Credits (2-0-2) performance criteria. Transport processes – infinitely dilute solutions,
concentrated solutions, thermal effects, fluid mechanics. Modeling
Pre-requisite(s): APL104, MCL111, MCL321 of electrochemical systems – governing equations, assumptions,
Types of brakes, Friction materials in brakes and their characteristics, boundary conditions of species and charge. Thermal management.
Design of brakes in passenger cars / vans: weight transfer, effect Environmental impact.
of tyre / road adhesion, wheel lock, brake efficiency / adhesion
utilization; Design of brakes in vehicle – trailer combinations: in light MCL701 Advanced Thermodynamics
trailers, overrun brakes, center axle trailer, chassis trailer; Brake-
3 Credits (3-0-0)
design analysis: Brake and shoe factors in different types of brakes,
Review of basic fundamentals, closed system and open system
Comparison of estimation by analytical and FE methods; Thermal
formulations, laws of thermodynamics, the maximum entropy
effects in friction brakes (thermal analysis and heat dissipation);
principle, concept of equations of state, ideal gas, van der Waals
Issues in electronic control of brakes: features of anti-lock brake
equations and other variants, compressibility, maximum work
system, Traction Control System, Electronic Stability Control, Adaptive
theorem, exergy, energy minimum principle, thermodynamic
Cruise Control, trailer Sway Control; Brake Noise: Sources, its analysis
potentials and relationships for compressible, elastic, electric and
(using analytical and FE based approaches) and control.
magnetic systems, stability conditions of potentials, multicomponent
MCL431 CAM and Automation systems, entropy of mixing, chemical potential, mixtures, conditions of
equilibrium and stability of multicomponent systems, thermodynamics
3 Credits (2-0-2)
of reactive mixtures.
Pre-requisite(s): for ME1: MCL131, MCL231
MCL702 Advanced Fluid Mechanics
for ME2: MCL136
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Automation need and types of automation, economics of automation,
FMS, CIM. Basics of electro-mechanical automation technologies, Formulation of Navier-Stokes equations. Exact solutions of the
Circuit design and applications of hydraulic, pneumatic, electro- Navier-Stokes equations for select unsteady/steady flows, potential
pneumatic, electro-hydraulic and programmable logic control (PLC) flows, boundary layer theory and its applications, turbulent
systems. Numerical control, NC and CNC hardware and programming, flows; special topics in fluid mechanics such as capillary and
Machine controls, HMI design and implementation, DNC system, electrokinetic flows.
Control engineering in production systems: open loop and closed loop
control systems, Automated material handling technologies, Group MCL703 Advanced Heat and Mass Transfer
technology, Computer aided process planning, Inspection automation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and reverse engineering, Rapid prototyping and tooling concepts and Derivation of governing equation for three dimensional transient heat
applications, virtual manufacturing. conduction problems. Two-dimensional steady state heat conduction.
Transient one-dimensional heat conduction in finite length bodies.
MCL441 Modelling and Experiments in Heat Transfer
Diffusive Mass Transfer – Fick’s law and governing equation. Melting
4 Credits (2-0-4) and solidification.
Pre-requisite(s): (MCL242 or MCL141) and MCP301 Newton’s law of cooling-Derivation of energy equation- Self-similar
Modelling heat transfer phenomena,comparison with experimental solution for laminar boundary flow over a flat plate – energy integral
data, assumptions and their implications. Mathematical modeling: method for laminar boundary layer flow over a flat surface-Laminar
dimensional analysis, scaling, physical similarity, self-similarity, internal flows-thermally fully developed flows-Graetz problem - Natural
physical laws and constitutive relations. Solution methodologies: convection over a vertical flat plate: similarity solutions and energy
separation of variables, self-similar solutions, boundary layer integral method- natural convection in enclosures-mixed convection-
analysis. Results: representation and interpretation, uncertainty Turbulent flow and heat transfer: Reynolds averaged equations-
and error bands. Heat transfer experiments: design, uncertainty Turbulent boundary layer flows – The law of wall-integral solutions.
analysis, selection of geometrical and physical parameters, Convective mass transfer.
instrumentation, and rig calibration. Temperature, pressure and flow Convection with phase change: Pool boiling regimes- Condensation:
rate measurements. Systemic errors in temperature measurement: drop-wise condensation-Laminar film condensation over a
thermocouples and thermowell. Data acquisition systems: basics and vertical surface.
applications. Data analysis and error estimation. Project-type work
Radiative heat transfer: Black body radiation-radiative properties of
involving modeling, designing and performing experiments related
non-black bodies-surface radiation heat transfer in enclosures with
to heat transfer applications.
gray diffused walls and non-gray surfaces.
MCL442 Thermofluid Analysis of Biosystems
MCL704 Applied Mathematics for Thermofluids
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL106 and [(MCL140 & MCL242) or MCL141] Initial-boundary value problems, Linear and Non-linear systems;
and EC 80 Theory of linear homogeneous and nonhomogeneous equations;
Applications of fluid mechanics, heat transfer, and thermodynamics Non-linear systems; Series solutions of linear ordinary differential
to biological processes,including blood flow in the circulatory equations; special functions; 1st order PDEs, classification of
system, heart function, effects of heating and cooling on cells, PDEs: 2nd order PDE - Planar, cylindrical and spherical geometries,
tissues, and proteins. Homogeneous and non homogeneous PDEs, Strum-Liouville theory;
Stability and instability of regular system.
MCL443 Electrochemical Energy Systems
MCL705 Experimental Methods
3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): MCL140 & MCL242 or MCL141 and EC 80
Methodology and planning of experimental work and reporting results.
Overlaps with: CLL722 (30%), CLL720 (10%), CLL721 (15%) Types of errors, uncertainty propagation and statistical basis of
Introduction to electrochemical systems – electrochemical power uncertainty. Statics and data interpretation: population and sample,
sources, nomenclature, survey of common types. Thermodynamics mean and standard deviation, standard deviation of mean, probability
– thermodynamic functions, chemical and electrochemical potentials, distributions and sample size selection. Design of experiments.
temperature dependence, activity dependence. Reaction kinetics – Instruments: specifications, characteristics, and sources of error.
electrical double layer, kinetics, activation energy of reactions, current- Data acquisition and signal processing: analog to digital conversion,
284

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
Fourier series and transform, sampling, aliasing, and filtering. Cross- for Interior and radiation problems in acoustics; Aerodynamic
correlation and autocorrelation. Digital image analysis. noise; Inhomogeneous wave equation; Lighthill’s acoustic analogy;
Introduction to statistical energy analysis.
MCL707 Thermal Turbomachines
MCL 713 Active Noise Control
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): UG: MCL241 Energy Systems and Technologies
Pre-requisite(s): For ME1/ME2: APL100, MTL100, MTL101
Overlaps: MCL822, MCL824
Acoustic wave equation; plane and spherical waves; Reflection and
Types of thermal turbomachines and their applications, energy
transmission; Passive control measures and their Limitations; Fourier
transfer in turbomachines, dimensional analysis and performance
series; Fourier Integral; Random processes; Laplace Transform;
parameters, axial flow turbines, radial flow turbines, steam and gas
Optimal filtering; z-transform; FIR and IIR filters; Active control
turbines, axial flow compressors, centrifugal compressors, axial and
in ducts; mechanisms of cancellation; Single channel feedforward
centrifugal fans, aircraft engines, gas turbines for power generation,
control of sound; LMS algorithm; Reference signals; FxLMS algorithm;
supercritical carbon dioxide turbines, wind turbines.
Identification of secondary paths; Single channel feedback control;
Active control of free field sound radiation; Global control of enclosed
MCL709 programming Robots with ROS 3D sound fields; Local control of enclosed 3D sound fields; Diffused
3 Credits (2-0-2) sound fields; Active control of sound in vibro-acoustic cavities;
Fundamental ROS Concepts, ROS architecture: Master, nodes, topics, Active structural-acoustic control (ASAC); Feedforward, Feedback
messages, services, parameters and actions. Robots & Simulators, and optimal control; Multichannel feedforward control; Applications
ROS console commands, Creating ROS Packages, Moving around using of active noise control; Implementation and demonstration of an
ROS, Teleop-bot, Building maps of the world, Navigating around the experimental active noise control system.
world, Robot localization in Map, ROS Navigation Stack, Implementing
MCL 714 Orthopedic Biomechanics and Implant Design
perception and robot behavior in ROS, Robot Vision implementation
with OpenCV and ROS, Adding your own sensors & actuators, creating 3 Credits (2-0-2)
mobile robot, Robot modeling in URDF and Simulation in Gazebo, Pre-requisite(s): For ME1/ME2: APL100, APL104, MCL211,
Robot manipulation with Movelt, ROS Industrial.
MCL311
Basic terminology and concept of human musculoskeletal system,
MCL710 Robotic Automation in Manufacturing
anatomy and overall function; Human gait analysis: Kinematics,
3 Credits (2-0-2) Kinetics, Dynamics and Control; Mechanical properties of bone;
Fluid Power for Robotic Automation, Motion Control, PLC Programming Growth, Modeling and Remodeling of Bone; Mechanical Properties
for Motion Control, Function Blocks for Robotic Motion. Control, of Muscles, Ligament and Tendon; Mechanics of cartilage and its
Standard Robotic arm configurations and hardware, principles of degradation; Joint replacement implants and its materials; Failure
path control, motion sensing, speed and position control, and servo- modes of orthopedic implants; Design of hip, knee and ankle implants.
actuators. End-effectors, supplemental tooling hardware, and sensor,
their interaction with other work-cell elements. Design of Robotic MCL715 Design for Noise, Vibration and Harshness
Manufacturing Cell for Assembly, Marching, Welding etc. Selection 3 Credits (2-0-2)
of Sensors, actuators, tool changers for automation. Simulation and
Pre-requisite(s): MCL733
Programming Robotic systems for Manufacturing applications.
Basic principles of environmental noise: Definition, basic attributes of
sound (wavelength, period, frequency velocity, speed, pressure, power
MCL711 Fracture Mechanics in Design
and sound intensity), units (decibel, dB(A) and SPL), Wave analysis
3 Credits (2-0-2)
of structures and spaces. Environmental noise propagation: Sources,
Pre-requisite(s): For ME1/ME2: APL100, APL104, MCL211 distance from source, atmospheric absorption, wind, temperature,
wind and temperature gradient, obstacles such as barriers and
Overlaps with: APL765 and MLL714
buildings, ground absorption, reflections, humidity. Perception and
Introduction; Linear elastic fracture mechanics: Inglis and Griffith
of effects of noise: Human ear & hearing damage, measures of
theories, energy release rate, stress intensity factor; Elastic-plastic
hearing, loudness, phones, noise descriptors. WHO guidelines for
fracture: plastic zone, J-integral; Mixed-mode fracture criteria;
community noise: speech masking, activity interference, noise and
Interfacial fracture criteria; Fatigue fracture: Crack nucleation and
sleep, noise annoyance. Noise measurements and instrumentation:
propagation, fatigue life predictions; Dynamic fracture: inertia effects
Noise measurement and control instrumentation, Leq and various
and rate dependent behavior; Experimental measurements of fracture
noise metrics for road, railway, aircraft and industrial noises. Various
toughness and SIF; Fracture modelling: FE simulation of fracture and
types of acoustic testing chambers. Source identification, Sound
fatigue failures, cohesive zone modeling; Applications of fracture
Intensity Mapping. Noise Control: Importance of reverberations time.
mechanics including in composites and joints; Case studies; Fracture
Design of absorption systems for required reverberation time. Noise
control and design considerations.
isolation design. Noise absorber design. Vibration Control Strategies:
Design of Isolators in machine foundations.
MCL712 Engineering Acoustics
3 Credits (3-0-0) MCL716 Mechatronics product Design
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): For ME1/ME2 and other UG students: APL100,
MTL100, MTL101 Pre-requisite(s): MCL212, ELL100 for UG
Acoustic wave equation; Sound propagation, absorption, reflection Introduction to mechatronic systems and components. Principles of
and transmission; Acoustical Transmission lines and filters; Analysis basic electronics. Microprocessors and their applications, integrated
of mufflers using transmission matrices; Acoustics of cavities; circuits, sensors, actuators, and other electrical/electronic hardware in
acoustic modes; Modal density; frequency response; Response via mechatronic systems. Principles of electronic/system communication.
modal analysis; Structural-acoustic cavities; weakly-coupled cavities Interfacing. DA and AD converters, software and hardware principles
Strongly-coupled cavities; coupled modes; Finite element analysis of and tools to build mechatronic systems. Design and selection of
interior acoustic problems; acoustic finite elements; coupling analysis; mechatronic elements namely sensors like encoders and resolvers;
panel contribution analysis; Sound radiation from structures; infinite stepper and servomotors, ball screws, solenoid like actuators, and
plates; finite plates; radiation efficiency; Rayleigh integral; Finite controllers with applications to CNC systems, robotics, consumer
element analysis of Sound radiation problems; Concept of radiation electronic products etc. Design of a mechatronic product using
modes; Basic idea of boundary element method and its application available software CAD packages.
285

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
MCL717 Machine Tool Design Role of Suspensions in Vehicle Dynamics: Independent Suspensions,
3 Credits (2-0-2) and Solid axles, roll center analysis important class of suspensions,
roll over stability of vehicles on suspensions.
Pre-requisite(s): MCL211 for UG
Design requirements of machine tools. A design approach for machine MCL724 Biomechanics in Trauma and Automotive Design
tools. Identification and quantification of objectives and constraints 3 Credits (3-0-0)
in machine tool design. Estimation of power requirements and
Introduction to Biomechanics of human body esp. its Musculo -skeletal
selection of motor for metal cutting machine tool spindles. Design
systems. Biomechanics (including injury indices) of the Head, Neck,
of gearbox, spindle and guideways. Principles of design of structural
Thorax and Lower Extremity, Crashworthiness standards-crash tests
components, namely, head stock, tail stock, carriage, table, knee,
and crash simulations, Human Body Models for analysis-Lumped
column and overarms to achieve desired static & fatigue strength,
mass, multi body, FE and integrated models, modeling of contact,
stiffness, dynamic characteristics and other requirements. Exercises
modeling of muscles, belts, modeling of airbags and other safety
on the design of machine tools using existing CAD and FEA software
devices. Human Anthropometry, Crash Dummies and Dummy
packages. Introduction to computer integrated manufacturing systems
models, Goals of crashworthiness in automotive design. Design
and CNC machine tools. Design/selection of linear motion systems,
of the automotive chassis for crashworthiness, Different aspects
ball, screws, CNC feedback devices, controllers, feed drives and
of crashworthiness-designing for frontal, side impact, rear impact,
servomotors for CNC machine tools. Recent developments in CNC
rollover and pedestrian/2 wheeler impacts, The future-current trends
and other machine tools.
in automotive crashworthiness.
MCL 718 Design for Manufacture and Assembly
MCL725 Design Electronic Assist Systems in Automobiles
3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MCL211 for UG Introduction to Automotive Electrical and Electronic Systems,
Life cycle of Mechanical Equipment Design. Requirements of life cycle Electric and Electronic components, Instrumentation: Gauges and
personnel like customer, management, marketing, manufacturing, sensors, Introduction to body computer: Microprocessor, Antilock
transportation, etc. Need to meet constraints of manufacturing. braking system: the mechanism and control implementation, Power
Advantages of designing for manufacturing and assembly to improve steering, Suspension, Air conditioning: controls and implementation,
product quality, cost and time to the market. Design for Manufacture Accessories: Intelligent windshield wipers, Power door locks,
and Assembly [DFMA] strategies. DFMA application case studies. Power windows, Power seats, Vehicle audio entertainment system,
Product design for manual assembly. Design for high speed automatic Navigation system, airbags and belt tensioners.
and robot assembly. Design for machining. Design for injection
MCL726 Design of Steering Systems
moulding, die casting and powder metal processing. Design for sheet
metal working. Computer aided DFMA. Architecture of DFMA and its 3 Credits (3-0-0)
implementation for Mechanical system Design. Introduction of steering requirements and system; steady-state
cornering – slip angle effects, steady-state turns, calculating steady-
MCL721 Automotive prime Movers
state steering characteristics, lateral weight transfer effect, traction
3 Credits (3-0-0) effect, neutral steer point and static margin, swing axle; steady-state
Introduction to current technologies, Design and Performance analysis cornering – steer effects, roll effects, wheel control, understeer
of MPFI-SI and CRDI-CI engines. Advanced thermodynamic modeling and oversteer effects, torque steer, lateral deflection steer, straight
of near DI-SI and HCCI-DI engines. Analysis of five stroke and six running, suspension geometry effects, effect of road surface, wind
stroke cycles for SI and CI engines. Design of Electric and Hydraulic handling; transient cornering, steering when moving forward, steering
Prime Movers. Concept, classification and analysis of Hybrid Prime when moving reverse, boat steering and truck in reverse; examples
mover systems. of steering system; conclusion.
MCL722 Mechanical Design of prime Mover Elements MCL728 Nanotribology
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction of prime-movers. Introduction of transmission-systems, Topics will include surface force and adhesion models for soft and hard
clutches and brakes. Engine Characteristics. Throttle system, solids; friction laws for nano, micro and macro contacts; atomic-scale
Turbochargers, History of valve train. Design of valve train. Design of stick-slip phenomenon; the roles of surface energy and surface forces
variable valve timing system, flywheel. Material selection. Lubrication on friction and wear; molecular structure effects on friction; nano-
systems to minimize the maintenance requirement. Modelling and lubrication and design of nano-lubricants (self-assembled monolayers,
design of gearbox. Role of control system in advanced (i.e. direct ultra-thin films of functionalized polymers); nano-texturing and
injection, active boosting, camless) powertrain system surface roughness effects; surface chemisorptions and physisorption
effects; friction-induced effects such as wear, molecular alignments,
MCL723 Vehicle Dynamics
tribo-charging, surface oxidation, third-body generation etc. The
3 Credits (2-0-2) above principles would be applied to modern technologies such as
Basics of Modeling: Euler Angles, Vehicle fixed and Earth fixed co- data storage (head-disk interface) tribology, various micromachines
ordinate systems. Application of Newton’s second law. Role of inertia. such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) tribology and
Vehicle Traction: Engine Performance Curves, Traction curves, Loads nature’s solutions to tribological problems through a few case studies.
on grades, Aerodynamic resistance, ideal gear shifting positions,
Rolling Resistance, Transverse weight shift due to accelerations, MCL729 Nanomechanics
maximum acceleration, Traction limits. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Braking Dynamics: Tire road friction, braking efficiency, wheel lock Introduction to nanomechanics, need for studying nanomechanics,
up, wheel skidding, performance with anti-lock brake systems. its scope and limitations; Dynamics of 2-atom, 3-atom molecules,
Vehicle Vibrations: Measures of Ride quality, predictions of vibrations, and an N-atom chain; Crystal Lattice and Reciprocal Lattice; Dynamic
suspension stiffness and damping, road roughness models, response Interaction Potentials and Periodic Boundary Conditions in molecular
to speed breakers, Heave, pitch and roll phenomenon of dynamic dynamics simulations; Role of different ensembles; Evaluation of
Motion, quarter car, half car and full car model, Seat suspension, atomic stresses and strains, Evaluation of Specific Heat, Dissipation
relation to human body vibrations. of Energy in nano-mechanical Systems; Solutions for classical Nano
Steering Dynamics: Steering system moments and forces, FWD,RWD scale structural components such as Carbon Nanotubes, Nano rods,
and 4WD steering systems, understeer and over steer, roll steer, Tire Nanowires and Polymers; Correlations between Nano-mechanics
cornering forces, slip angle, critical speed, roll stability, steering of and classical continuum theory of solids; Size effect; Introduction to
heavy vehicles, steering dynamics of tractor trailer systems. multiscale modeling.
286

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
MCL730 Designing with advanced materials advanced curves; Modeling of surfaces: ruled surfaces, surfaces of
4 Credits (3-0-2) revolution, Bicubic, Bezier, B-splines; Feature Based Modeling and
Feature Recognition.
Introduction to polymers, composites and smart materials. Polymer
microstructure and mechanical properties. Thermosets and
MCL736 Automotive Design
thermoplastics. Viscoelastic creep and relaxation behavior, mechanical
models, and polymer failure. Design considerations and practices 4 Credits (3-0-2)
for polymeric components with case studies. Composite materials History of automotive design, Design cycle for an Automobile,
and their applications. Micro and macro mechanics of lamina, failure Styling, Loads on the chassis, Chassis and structural Design for static
criteria of lamina, classical laminate theory, strength of laminates. loads, Dynamic and impact loads, Energy absorption in the vehicle,
Design considerations and practices for composite structures with case Computational tools for structural design, vehicle occupant system
studies. Structure, applications and design considerations of smart analysis, biomechanics of the human body and its implications for
materials such as shape memory alloys and piezoelectric materials. structural design, Designing for NVH, Designing the suspension
system, Designing the brake system, Design of engine characteristics,
MCL731 Analytical Dynamics Design requirements of the transmission and the driveline.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCL738 Dynamics of Multibody Systems
Pre-requisite(s): APL100 and MCL111
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Overlaps with: PYL551 Overview of kinematic descriptions of serial, tree, and closed-loop
Review of Newtonian dynamics; Degrees of freedom; Generalized chains, Degrees of freedom, and Kinematic constraints of rigid and
coordinates and constraints; Holonomic and nonholonomic systems; flexible systems; Basics of Euler-Lagrange and other classical dynamic
Principle of Virtual work; D’Alembert’s principle; Euler-Lagrange formulations, and those with orthogonal complements; Dynamic
equations of motion; Hamilton’s principle; Rotating coordinate algorithms (inverse and forward dynamics); Efficiency and numerical
systems; Euler angles; Coordinate transformation; Kinematics of a stability aspects of the algorithms; Introduction to commercial
rigid body; Euler’s equations of rotation; Computer-oriented dynamic software like RecurDyn.
modeling; Orthogonal-complement based formulation of dynamic
MCL740 Advanced Lubrication
equations; Geometric theory; Stability; Lyapunov’s direct method;
Introduction to flexible-body dynamics. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Introduction: surface topography and its 2-D and 3-D characterizations,
MCL732 Air pollution: Sources and Apportionment interactions of surfaces, friction, wear, lubrication; Regimes of
3 Credits (3-0-0) lubrication: hydrodynamic, elastohydrodynamic, mixed, boundary,
Stribeck curve; Lubricant: mineral oil, synthetic oil, grease, emulsions,
Pre-requisite(s): MTL101, APL106 for UG students gases, properties of lubricants, various rheology models; Derivation
Air Pollution – Dominant pollution sources and the relevant emission of governing equations: conservations of mass, momentum,
physics, physicochemical characteristics and emission control. energy, establishing 3-D Reynolds equation and energy equation for
Application of multivariate statistical methods to air pollutant transport lubrication simulations; Cavitation and turbulence models; Contact
& source apportionment. Application to air pollution in Delhi-NCR. mechanics: 2-D and 3-D contacts, surface and subsurface stresses,
asperity contact models, elastic deformation at contacts; Applications
MCL733 Vibration and Noise Engineering of governing equations in design and performance analysis of journal
3 Credits (3-0-0) bearings, thrust bearings, squeeze film bearings, hydrostatic bearings,
rolling bearings, gear sets, seals, and piston rings; Lubrication in metal
Elements of vibration analysis: modeling practical systems through
forming; Dynamic coefficients: stiffness and damping calculations,
discrete system/lumped parameters approach and its subsequent
rotor vibrations, oil-whirl instability, and friction instabilities; Failure
analysis for different types of excitations encountered in practice.
analysis of lubricated contacts/interfaces, Immerging technology:
Alternate mathematical models of damping, two and multi-DOF
surface textures and bionic surfaces.
systems, tuned mass dampers. Introduction to vibration isolation:
displacement/force isolation, approaches for MDOF system analysis
MCL741 Control Engineering
with emphasis on modal approach. Numerical and Continuum
Analysis: Finite Element Method for dynamic analysis. Distributed 4 Credits (3-0-2)
parameter models of rods, bars, beams, membranes and plates. An introduction to control systems; transfer function representation of
Introduction to Modal testing, Vibration Testing. Spatial, Modal and mechanical and mechatronic systems; stability analysis, gain setting for
Response models of vibrating systems. Non-linear and Random stability; transient and steady-state response analyses; control system
vibrations: Introduction to non-linear vibrations, response to random analysis and design by the Root-Locus method and the Frequency-
excitation. Engineering acoustics: Wave approach to sound, wave Response method; PID controllers design and realization; State-Space
equation, Noise measurement and instrumentation standards. representation, controllability and observability; control system
Sound pressure, power and intensity and its measurement, Sound design in State Space; digital implementation of classical controllers.
Intensity, Various Sound Fields, Concept of Monopoles, Dipoles and
Quadrupoles, Sound Power measurement, Transmission loss, Design MCL742 Design & Optimization
of partitions, barriers, acoustic enclosures, Design of Mufflers; Sound 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Absorbing Materials, Noise Control approaches, case studies. Review of machine element design based on strength and distortion
criterion; review of choice of materials and their treatment: Designing
MCL735 CAD and Finite Element Analysis for fatigue, creep; Design criterion for fracture; Application of advanced
4 Credits (3-0-2) design criterion to machine elements (like shafts, spur / bevel / worm
Introduction and overview. Need and Scope of Computer Aided gears); Design of structures, machines and equipment; Classical
Machine Design. Role of Geometric Modelling, FE and Optimization; methods of unconstrained optimization (single variable and multi
Introduction to the Finite Element Method, principles of minimization variable), classical methods of constrained optimization, Numerical
of potential energy: Rayleig Ritz and Galerkin Methods, 1D elements optimisation techniques including i. genetic algorithms, (binary and
and their analysis, analysis of bars, beams and trusses, axis- real coded) ii. Simulated annealing. Case studies of Optimum Design
symmetric solids, 2D/3D solids, solution methods in FE, error analysis, (Gear Box, Power Transmission, shape and topology using FE).
Introduction to Dynamic and Non linear analysis; Limitations of FEM;
MCL743 plant Equipment Design
2D and 3D Geometric transformations, Orthographic and Perspective
Projections. Euler angles, Windowing, view-porting and viewing 3 Credits (3-0-0)
transformations, Modeling of cubics, beziers, b-splines, NURBS and Introduction to various kinds of plant equipment, and technological
287

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
considerations in their design. Special considerations for typical stochastic scenarios), Algorithms (branch and bound, Metaheuristics
industries such as petrochemicals, food-processing, power plants, and etc.), Formulation of bigger optimization problems and solving using
for mass production. Pressure vessel types and shapes. Design analysis available solvers (eg. CPLEX). Shop-floor scheduling.
of thin walled vessel for low pressure applications. Design analysis
of thick walled vessels for high pressures and special applications. MCL753 Manufacturing Informatics
Vessel opening, closures and seals. Manufacturing considerations 4 Credits (3-0-2)
for pressure vessels. Configuration of various kinds of pumps used
in process plants. Pump design considerations. Centrifugal pump Pre-requisite(s): MCL361
selection. Design of pipes and piping joints, Layout of piping systems. Introduction to manufacturing analytics (manufacturing analytics
Material Handling Equipment, Types and use. Design considerations concepts, contemporary issues in high-value manufacturing, and
for hoisting equipment, Surface and Overhead equipment Stackers opportunities provided by analytics and big data technologies), data
and elevators, and conveyors. Design consideration in rotating types and applications (point of sale data, service touch point data,
machinery, bearing characteristics and selection, placement of service centre data, warranty data, machine condition data, machine
critical speeds, effect of seals and foundation effects. Materials and failure history, machine utilisation data, work in process data and
manufacturing considerations in various plant equipment systems, online quality control data), optimisation of manufacturing processes
and use of applicable standards, and available software packages. (optimisation concepts, evolutionary computing, multi-objective
optimisation, and applications of optimisation for sequential and
MCL745 Robotics assembly processes), and latest advancements in manufacturing
analytics (virtual reality, augmented reality, and motion capture
4 Credits (3-0-2)
gaming technologies for manufacturing).
Type and components of robots; Classification of closed- and open-
loop kinematic systems; Definition of mechanisms and manipulators;
MCL754 Operations planning and Control
Kinematic constraints; Degrees of freedom and mobility; Rotation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
representation; Coordinate transformation; DH parameters; Matrix
methods for forward and inverse kinematics analyses; Jacobian Evolution of Scientific Management and Buzzwords, Inventory
and singularity; Dynamic modeling; Euler-Lagrange and Newton- Management and Control, MRP and ERP, JIT, Modeling of Processes
Euler equations of motion for serial type manipulators; DeNOC- and Systems, Measuring and Improving Performance, Scheduling,
based dynamic formulation; Inverse and forward dynamics algorithms; Aggregate Production Planning, Facility Location.
Parallel robots; Inverse and forward kinematics of parallel robots; Gain
singularity of parallel robots; Introduction to control of robotic systems. MCL755 Service System Design
3 Credits (2-0-2)
MCL747 Design of precision Machines
Pre-requisite(s): MTL108
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Need for servitization, Service system types, Key dimensions of
Pre-requisite(s): For UG:AML140, MCL111, MCL211 service systems, Frameworks for service system design, tools for
Fundamental concepts in precision design; design for stiffness; service system design, Value co-creation, Service quality models,
controlling Degrees-of-Freedom, exact-constrained design; design Economics of service systems, Service contract design, CMMI-SVC
of elastic mechanisms/flexures/compliant mechanisms; friction, model for service systems, Case studies on service system design.
hysteresis and micro-slip; actuators and sensors for precision motion;
MCL756 Supply Chain Management
materials selection in precision machine design; slideways for long
range precision motion; and dynamics of precision mechanisms. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): MCL361
MCL748 Tribological Systems Design
Supply Chain Orientation and Management, Various flows in a typical
4 Credits (3-0-2) supply chain, Supply chain strategy – its context, components and
Lubrication, Friction and Wear aspects in Design; Tribological Surfaces structure, Location Decisions, Inventory Decisions, Information
– Measures of Roughness and associated mechanisms of Lubrication, Decisions – Bull whip effect and its ramifications, remedies,
Regimes of Lubrication; Boundary lubrication and lubricants. Friction Transportation Decisions - including planning techniques, Supply
and wear at different length scales. Viscosity - its representation and chain modeling and analysis, Performance measurement; Various
measurement, apparent viscosity. Selection of Bearings - Rubbing, frameworks including Balanced Score Card, SCOR etc., Customer
Fluid Film, Rolling Element. Lubricants - Types and Selection, Bearing Service level selection and supply chain vulnerabilities, Reverse
Design - Rubbing, Fluid Film Journal and Thrust, Dynamically Loaded, Logistics and decision making involved, Supply chain integration and
Rolling Element, Design of lubrication Systems. Introduction to web enabled supply management.
maintenance of Bearings, Seals, Linear Bearing Design, Slideways.
Material considerations for selected tribological applications. MCL757 Logistics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCL750 product design and Manufacturing
Logistics Management is the part of supply chain management that
3 Credits (1-0-4) plans, implements, and controls the efficient, effective forward and
Product design for a given need or identified need, Development reverse flow and storage of goods, services, and related information
and evaluation of multiple solutions and concepts, Manufacturability between the point of origin and the point of consumption in order to
assessments of given design, Product Costing and Bill of meet customers’ requirements.
Materials, Process planning for components and assembly, Product This course provides a practical, management perspective of the
manufacturing and Testing. following areas of logistics: distribution, transportation, international
logistics, inventory control, sustainable logistics practices, key
MCL751 Industrial Engineering Systems performance indicators, supply chain finance, leadership in a supply
chain role, and an introduction to logistics technology including RFID
3 Credits (1-0-4)
and ERP systems.
Overview of IE methods and tools such as decision making under
uncertainty (Pay-off tables, decision trees, utility theory etc.),
MCL758 OpTIMIZATION
Probability based methods for outcome prediction (Logistic regression,
Bayesian belief networks, Monte Carlo simulation etc.), Multicriteria 3 Credits (3-0-0)
decision making (AHP, ANP, Graph theory etc.), System Simulation Optimization Theory in single and multiple dimensions, Karush-Kuhn-
(through games like the Beer game for supply chain), Queuing Tucker Conditions, Non Linear Programming, Solution Methods,
theory games, Economic analysis (NPV, IRR etc. for deterministic and Stochastic Programming, Applications and case studies.
288

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
MCL759 Entrepreneurship MCL771 Value Engineering and Life Cycle Costing
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Ideation, Team Building, Making of a Business Plan, Securing Funding, Introduction to Value Engineering and Value Analysis, Methodology
Legal Procedures, Case studies of successful and failed attempts. of V.E., Quantitative definition of use value and prestige value,
Estimation of product quality/performance, Classification of Functions,
MCL760 project Management Functional Cost and Functional Worth, Effect of value improvement
on profitability. Introduction to V.E. Job plan / Functional Approach to
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Value Improvement, Various phases and techniques of the job plan.
Pre-requisite(s): MTL108
Life Cycle Costing for managing the Total Value of a Product, Cash
The nature of projects, the project as a non-repetitive unit production flow diagrams, Concepts in LCC, Present Value concept, Annuity cost
system, the project as an agent of change. Project Identification concept, Net Present Value, Pay Back period, Internal rate of return on
considering objectives and SWOT analysis, Screening of project ideas, investment (IRR), Continuous discounting, Examples and illustrations.
Technical, Market, Financial, Socio-economic and Ecological Appraisal Creative thinking and creative judgment, False savings, System
of a project. Work break down structure and network development. Reliability, Evaluation Matrix, Assessment of value alternatives,
Basic Scheduling, Critical Path and four kinds of floats, Scheduling Estimation of weights and efficiencies, Sensitivity analysis, Utility
under probabilistic durations, Time Cost tradeoffs, Project Monitoring transformation functions, Fast diagramming, Critical path of functions,
with PERT/Cost, Organizational aspects, Computer packages and DARSIRI method of value analysis. Critical review of some industry
project completion. oriented projects and case studies.
MCL761 probability and Statistics
MCL772 Reliability Engineering
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Probability Laws, Random Variables, Conditional Probability and
Time to failure distributions; Parameter estimation for non-
Bayes Theorem, Important Random Variables and their properties,
repairable systems; Reliability models for series, parallel and mixed
Joint Probability Distributions, Law of Total Probability, Law of Large
configurations; Reliability models for active/passive redundancy,
Numbers, Central Limit Theorem, Estimation Theory, Parameter
load sharing systems, mixed population, competing failure modes;
Estimation, Hypothesis Testing using Parametric and Non-Parametric
Stress-Strength models; Conditional reliability models and residual
Methods, Goodness of fit tests, ANOVA, Linear Regression (Simple,
life calculation; Reliability models for multiple operational phases;
Generalized) and Logistics Regression.
Shock based reliability models; Reliability models for non-repairable
systems; Parameter estimation for repairable systems, Failure Mode
MCL763 Network Models for public Systems
and Effects Analysis, Fault Tree Analysis; Failure simulation; Warranty
3 Credits (3-0-0) cost analysis; Reliability allocation; Reliability of production systems;
Introduction to complex networked public systems. Centrality Test plan design for non-accelerated life tests; Accelerated life testing
measures. Metrics for network evaluation. Power-law distribution of models; Burn-in test plans.
node degrees. Structure of real-world networks. Network construction.
Erdos-Renyi & Watts-Strogatz random graph model. Configuration MCL773 Quality Systems
model. Generating function-based network methods. Exponential
3 Credits (3-0-0)
random graph models. Preferential attachment network formation
model. Barabasi-Albert model. Structural optimization of networks. Introduction to quality systems through approaches proposed by Juran,
Percolation and network resilience. Network-based supervised Deming, Baldridge, Taguchi, Crossby etc., Quality costs, Requirements
learning. Community detection methods. Unsupervised network analysis using methods like Kano’s analysis, Requirement mapping
representation learning. Network-based semi-supervised learning. using QFD, Product and process analysis using Design and Process
Network spatial analysis. Networked markets. FMEA, Robust design and process improvement using online and
offline methods for design and analysis of experiments, Shainin’s
tools for variability reduction, Process capability analysis and loss
MCL765 Operations Research
functions, Statistical tolerancing, Design of control charts and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
acceptance sampling plans, Quality standards like IS0 9000, ISO
The art and science of modeling, Linear Programming, Solution 14000, CMMI etc.; Service quality models and Service blueprints and
methods including Simplex, Sensitivity Analysis, Shadow Pricing and Service FMEA, Case studies.
Duality Theory, Integer Programming and Solution methods, Dynamic
Programming with applications, Large Canonical problems such as
MCL775 Special Topics in Industrial Engineering
Transportation Problem, Traveling Salesman Problem, Network Flow
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Problem, Case Studies.
To be decided by the instructor at the time of offering.
MCL769 Metal Forming Analysis
MCL776 Advances in Metal Forming
4 Credits (3-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Revision of fundamentals of plastic deformation and metal forming,
Constitutive equations for plastic deformation, effect of strain, strain Pre-requisite(s): For UG: MCL131 or MCL132; for PG MCL769
rate and temperature, Theory of plasticity, Analysis of important Advanced metal forming processes such as tube and sheet
bulk forming processes and sheet metal forming processes, hydroforming, High energy rate forming processes such as EMF,
Workability, Upper and lower bound methods, Slipline field theory, EHF and explosive forming. Design of dies for forging, extrusion and
Defects in sheet metal forming, Introduction to FE analysis of forming wire drawing, Die design for sheet metal forming processes such as
processes. single and multi-stage deep drawing, bending and stretch forming.
Materials used for making forming tools, Lubrication mechanisms,
MCL770 Stochastic Modeling and Simulation Metal forming equipment, Formability testing of sheet metals,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Determination of Forming Limit Diagrams and their applications,
Warm forming, Micro forming.
Overview of Probability Basics, Introduction to Discrete Time
Markov Chains (DTMC), Transient and Limiting analysis of DTMC,
MCL778 Design and Metallurgy of Welded Joints
Introduction to Continuous Time Markov Chains (CTMC), Transient
and Limiting analysis of DTMC, Applications, Discrete Event Simulation 4 Credits (3-0-2)
- Introduction, Generation of Random Variables, Simulation modeling Importance of welding in fabrication, Problems and difficulties in
through case studies. welded structures, service and fabrication tests and their importance,
289

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
weld testing and qualification, causes and remedies for weld defects, – measurement of residual stresses – introduction to X-ray
weld symbols, weld joint design for strength and quality and diffractometry – XRD measurement of residual stress – application
automation in welding. of Barkhausen Noise Technique in grinding.
Special Machining and grinding processes such as • Ductile Regime
MCL780 Casting Technology Grinding • Diamond Turning.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
MCL782 Computational Methods
Sand casting: sand molding techniques, Core sand and core
fabrication. 2 Credits (2-0-0)
Other casting: Permanent mold, pressure die casting, squeeze Errors in numerical calculations and series approximations, Solution of
casting, centrifugal casting, continuous casting, stir casting, defects algebraic and transcendental equations, Interpolation of data, finite
and inspection. differences, Curve fitting, Numerical differentiation and integration,
Matrices and linear system of equations, Numerical solution of
Gating system, risering system, casting design: Metallurgical
ordinary differential and partial differential equations, Solution
consideration, design consideration, economical consideration. Fluidity
of integral equations, Numerical solution of important production
testing, Application of CAD\CAM in foundry.
engineering problems.
Casting of complicated shapes: automotive components, casting of
light alloys – Aluminum, magnesium and Titanium alloys.
MCL783 Automation in Manufacturing
Advances in near net shape manufacturing: Metal Injection moulding,
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Laser engineered net shaping.
Introduction to Automation of different manufacturing processes.
Types of systems - mechanical, electrical, electronics; Data conversion
MCL781 Machining processes and Analysis
devices, transducers, signal processing devices, relays, contactors and
4 Credits (3-0-2)
timers. Sensors and their interfaces; Hydraulics & Pneumatic Systems
Introduction to basic traditional machining processes – the need and design and their application to manufacturing equipment; Sequence
requirements for such processes and their brief application areas. operation of hydraulic and pneumatic cylinders and motors; Electro
Specifications and geometry of various cutting tools such as turning Pneumatic & Electro Hydraulic Systems design, Relay Logic circuits,
tools, drills, milling cutters in different referencing systems such as Feedback control systems, PID Controller; Drives and mechanisms
work reference, tool reference and machine reference systems. of an automated system: stepper motors, servo drives. Ball screws,
Methods and techniques used for sharpening / resharpening of these linear motion bearings, electronic caming and gearing, indexing
cutting tools. mechanisms, tool magazines, and transfer systems. Programmable
Logic Controllers, I/Os, system interfacing, ladder logic, functional
Mechanisms of chip formation by single point, drilling and milling
blocks, structured text, and applications. Human Machine Interface
tools. Different types of chips obtained during machining. Concept
& SCADA; Motion controller and their programming, PLCOpen
of effective rake angle during machining.
Motion Control blocks, multi axes coordinated motion, CNC control;
Mechanics of machining of single point cutting tool, drill and milling
RFID technology and its application; Machine vision and control
cutter – estimation of cutting forces using analytical models,
applications. Modular Production Systems – Distribution, Conveying,
Experimental methods and instruments used for cutting force
Pick & Place etc.
determination during machining processes, essential design features
Laboratory work will be hands-on design and operation of automatic
of the dynamometers used for such measurement.
systems.
Heat transfer during machining processes, identification of the
different sources of heat generation and development of suitable
MCL784 Computer Aided Manufacturing
models for analytical estimation of the cutting temperature,
Experimental methods used for estimating cutting temperature. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Use of cutting fluids in machining – purposes, proper selection and An overview of Computer Aided Manufacturing. Use and Programming
methods of application of such cutting fluids. of Computer Controlled Machines such as CNC, 3D Printing, CMM,
Robots etc. Constructional aspects of computer controlled machines.
Advanced cutting tool materials and processes used for development
Geometric modeling and computational geometry for manufacturing.
of such tools.
Product Life-cycle modeling. Virtual and Distributed Manufacturing.
Mechanics of cutting tool wear and development of models for
assessing the tool life.
MCL785 Advanced Machining processes
Economics of machining – identifying the major parameters in
3 Credits (3-0-0)
machining and their roles on cutting force, surface finish and cutting
Introduction to advanced machining processes – need for such
temperature, selection of optimal conditions of process parameters
processes and application areas.
to reduce machining costs through suitable models.
Mechanical Energy utilized advanced machining processes like
Introduction to Grinding processes and understanding of the
ultrasonic machining, abrasive flow machining, magnetic abrasive
differences between machining and grinding.
finishing,magneto-rheological finishing, abrasive water jet machining
Grinding for bulk material removal – creep feed grinding – fast feed
– mechanics of cutting, process parametric analysis, process
grinding.
capabilities, applications.
Superabrasive grinding wheels – both monolayer and multilayer,
Thermoelectric based advanced machining processes like electro
advantages of the monolayer wheel and its applications.
discharge machining, wire EDM, Plasma Arc Machining, Laser Beam
Grinding Geometry and Kinematics – contact length – measurement Machining, Focussed Ion Beam Machining – working principles,
of contact length definition of active grits and methods used for material removal mechanisms, process capabilities and applications.
estimating active grits, use of single grit experiments to develop Electrochemical and Chemical Advanced Machining – ECG,
models for estimating forces and specific energy requirement in Electrostream Drilling, Chemical Machining – process characteristics,
grinding. numerical modelling of the processes, applications and limitations.
Wheel Conditioning – truing and dressing techniques and parameters
– effect of dressing on grinding wheel parameters – dressing of MCL786 Metrology
super-abrasive wheels. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Temperature generation during grinding process and thermal Introduction to Dimensional Metrology, standardization,
modelling of the process. interchangeability, selective assembly, Indian standard specifications,
Thermal damages in grinding – burning – oxidation – tempering application of tolerances, Limit gauging- Taylor’s principles of
– residual stresses – effect of residual stresses on job quality limit gauging, Design of Gauges, Inspection by measurement;
290

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
interferometers. GD&T, Applications of Dimensional Inspection, cavity, split core designs. Advances in injection molding process-
Inspection of Surface Quality, Feature inspection- straightness, microcellular, gas assisted, insert, outsert, push-pull, multilive,
flatness, parallelism, squareness, circularity and roundness. vibration assisted, micro lamellar, lost core. Designing with plastics,
Automated Dimensional Measurements: Introduction, Automatic applications and future research.
Gauging, Automatic Measuring Machines for inspecting multiple
work piece dimensions, Automatic Gauging Machine Part-Matching MCL795 Laser processing of Materials
Functions, Coordinate Measuring Machines-Types, Probes, Accessories, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Measurement, Computer supported Coordinate Measurements.
Pre-requisite(s): For UG students: MCL231 or MCL 131
MCL787 Welding Science and Technology Sources and condition for generation of laser beam; Main industrial
4 Credits (3-0-2) lasers and their characteristics; laser beam interaction with matter-
CW, pulsed, ultrashort laser pulse; heat flow theory and metallurgical
General survey and classification of welding processes, importance
considerations; laser and laser assisted cutting; laser drilling; laser
of advanced materials and joining technologies, weld arc physics,
and laser assisted welding; laser transformation hardening; laser
power sources and their characteristics, welding technologies related
remelting; laser surface alloying and cladding; laser surface texturing;
to industries: automotive, aerospace, nuclear, oil and gas industries.
LCVD and LPVD; laser beam shaping and its application in laser
MCL788 Surface Engineering surface modifications; Laser metal forming; laser shock peening;
Laser based additive manufacturing- fundamentals, key features,
4 Credits (3-0-2)
challenges and applications; Laser interaction with the metal powder;
Introduction to surface engineering – importance and scope of surface Security challenges in laser based additive manufacturing; Theoretical
engineering, conventional surface engineering practices like pickling, modelling of laser material processing; On-line process monitoring
grinding, buffing etc., surface engineering by material addition and control of laser-based material processing and its significance on
like electroplating, surface modification of ferrous and non-ferrous mechanical and metallurgical properties; Economics of laser; Laser
materials like nitriding, cyaniding, aluminizing etc. applications in other manufacturing and metrological processes (laser
Advanced surface engineering practices like laser assisted surface marking, laser cleaning etc.) and physics behind the process; laser
modification, electron beam assisted modification, spraying safety; laser safety standards and safety procedures.
techniques like flame and plasma spraying, high velocity oxyfuel,
cold spray techniques. MCL796 Additive Manufacturing
Sputter deposition processes, PVD and CVD methods of surface 4 Credits (3-0-2)
coatings, surface modification by ion implantation and ion beam mixing. Review of solid modeling techniques with comparison.
Characterisation of the engineered surface and coatings like Product development. Simultaneous Engineering and Additive
thickness, porosity and adhesion of coatings, surface microscopy and Manufacturing(AM). Basic Principle of AM processes. Support structure
spectroscopic analysis of the modified surfaces. in Additive Manufacturing. Containment and critical applications.
Functional coatings and their applications. Generation of the physical layer model. Classification of AM Processes.
Virtual Prototyping. Tessellation (STL format) and tessellation
MCp790 process Engineering algorithms. Defects in STL files and repairing algorithms. Slicing and
4 Credits (2-0-4) various slicing procedures. Accuracy and Surface quality in Additive
Manufacturing. Effect of part deposition orientation on accuracy,
Understanding relation between geometry, materials and
surface finish, build time, support structure, cost etc. Various Rapid
manufacturing in relation to process planning. Design for Manufacture
tooling techniques. Introduction to Reverse Engineering. Reverse
and Assembly, Product life-cycle considerations, Selection of raw
engineering and Additive Manufacturing.
material geometries, process selection, selection of manufacturing
equipment, process sequencing, tooling, work holding and In-process
MCL797 Freedom and Constraints in Design
inspection. Process Planning for Assembly & Inspection, Computer
Aided Process Planning, Lean concepts in manufacturing. 3 Credits (3-0-3)
Pre-requisite(s): For UG: AML140 and MCL111; For Non-ME
MCL791 processing and Mechanics of Composite
PG: MCL799
Materials
The course contents will include lecture & hands-on-experience
4 Credits (3-0-2) covering: Degrees-of-Freedom and constraints, exact-constrained
Introduction to matrix materials - polymers, metals and ceramics. design; design of elastic mechanisms/flexures/complaint mechanisms;
Introduction to reinforcements – fibers, flakes, particulates: macro, constraint and mobility analysis using screw algebra; design for
micro and nano. Hand layup, tape layup, autoclave moulding, vacuum stiffness; friction and hysteresis; actuators and sensors for robotic
bag moulding, compression moulding, resin transfer moulding, application. The course contents also include different case studies and
reaction injection moulding, filament winding, pultrusion, braiding, then working on different course projects identified by the students.
and other manufacturing variants. Macromechanics of a lamina as
a building block of a composite structure, stress-strain relation, MCL798 Medical Robotics
strain –stress relation for anisotropic material, orthotropic materials, 3 Credits (2-0-2)
material property matrix estimation, micromechanics of a lamina,
Introduction to medical robotics-history, evolution, and various
effect of fiber volume fraction on properties, failure theories of a
classifications; Design requirements and specification with respect to
lamina. Laminate analysis, failure of a laminate, design principles of
safety and reliability; Kinematic structure of various robots in medical
tailor made material systems.
applications, kinematics and dynamics; Design of robots used for
surgery and rehabilitation, Design of rigid and flexible instruments
MCL792 Injection Molding and Mold Design
for surgical interventions; Design of prosthetic devices; Introduction
3 Credits (2-0-2)
to medical imaging and image-guided interventions; Teleoperation
Introduction to Injection molding fundamentals, flow of non- and controller design aspects; Ancillary units; Case studies covering
Newtonian fluids, flow of various polymer melts in a cavity, molding each application with respect to design.
cycle, injection molding machine characteristics- injection unit design,
clamping unit design, shrinkage, warpage, defect free product, MCL799 Mechanics and Control of Robots
Moldflow analysis – fundamentals of FE analysis for fill, cool, warp, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
stress, DOE, results interpretation. Mold design fundamentals, type
Pre-requisite(s): For UG: APL100: Engineering Mechanics; For
of molds - two plate, three plate, feeding system – sprue, runner,
gate design, ejection system - pin, sleeve, stripper plate, air ejection PG: None
design. Moldings with undercuts – internal, external, threads, split Introduction to Kinematics; Rigid body kinematics-translations and
291

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
rotations; Coordinate transformations; Newton-Euler equations external flows-Laminar internal flows-Transition flow-Heat transfer
of motion; Recursive techniques; Principle of virtual work and in transition flow-Reynolds averaged equations of motion, Averaged
D’Alembert’s principle; Euler-Lagrange equations of motion; DeNOC energy equations-Turbulent flow and heat transfer over a flat
based dynamic modelling; Trajectory planning; Forward and Inverse plate-Turbulent flow and heat transfer in pipes and channels-
Dynamics; Transfer function and state-space representation of Laminar and turbulent natural convection-laminar and turbulent
dynamical systems; Controllers (P, PD, PID); Phase portraits; mixed convection - Pool boiling : nucleate boiling-film boiling, flow
Equilibrium points and their classification; Lyapunov stability; Non- boiling-condensation : dropwise condensation-film condensation
linear trajectory control; Cartesian and force control. Nusselt theory-Special topics-Convective heat transfer in rotating
systems, Microscale convective heat transfer, Convective heat
MCD800 professional project Activity transfer with nano-fluids, Combined convection and radiation,
3 Credits (0-0-6) Double diffusive convection.
Project Work.
MCL815 Fire Dynamics and Engineering
MCD810 Major project part-I (Thermal Engineering) 4 Credits (2-0-4)
12 Credits (0-0-24) Basics of Conservation equations, Turbulence, radiation and
thermochemistry. Ignition of solids- Burning and heat release rates.
Properties of fire plumes- buoyant plumes and interactions with
MCD811 Major project part-I (Thermal Engineering)
surfaces. Turbulent diffusion flames- structure, modeling, soot
6 Credits (0-0-12) formation and radiation effects. Toxic products. Fire chemistry, thermal
decomposition of bulk fuel, pyrolysis, nitrogen and halogen chemistry.
MCL811 Advanced power Generation Systems Fire growth- ignition, initial conditions, flame and fire spread theory,
3 Credits (3-0-0) feedback to fuel. Compartment zone models. Flashover, post-flashover
and control. Fire detection, suppression methods, codes, standards
General Introduction to current power generation technology and
and laws. Case studies of real fires- buildings, transport, industries,
need for advances systems. Analysis of Advanced Ultra super-ciritical
shamiana and jhuggi-jhonpdi etc.
power plants, Organic Rankine Cycle based systems, Power systems
using mixtures as working fluids. Sizing of components for the
MCL816 Gas Dynamics
selected systems. Design of power systems for solar, biomass and
geothermal sources. Thermo-fluid analysis of solar PV systems. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Hybrid solar PV-thermal systems. Recent developments in hydro Revision of fundamentals. Thermodynamics of compressible flow
power systems. – wave motion in compressible medium, Mach number and cone,
properties. Steady one-dimensional compressible flow through
MCD812 Major project part 2 (Thermal Engineering) variable area ducts. Converging and converging-diverging nozzles
12 Credits (0-0-24) and diffusers. Effects of heating and friction in duct flow, Rayleigh
and Fanno lines. Flows with normal shocks. Oblique shocks and
reflection. Expansion waves. Prandtl-Meyer flow. Flow over bodies.
MCL812 Combustion
Measurements and applications. Jet propulsion – types of engines,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
propulsion fundamentals. Compressor, combustor and turbines
Introduction - importance of combustion. Chemical thermodynamics construction and performance. Rocket propulsion – basics, solid and
and chemical kinetics. Important chemical mechanisms. Coupling liquid propelled engines, parametric studies, construction features,
chemical and thermal analysis of reacting systems. Premixed single and multi-stage rockets. Thrust chamber and nozzle models.
systems: detonation and deflagration, laminar flames, burning Studies of in-use engines. Environmental aspects.
velocity, flammability limits, quenching and ignition. Turbulent
premixed flames. Non-premixed systems: laminar diffusion flame MCL817 Heat Exchangers
jet, droplet burning. Combustion of solids: drying, devolatilization 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and char combustion. Practical aspects of coal combustion,
Applications. Basic design methodologies – LMTD and effectiveness-
woodstove combustion.
NTU methods. Overall heat transfer coefficient, fouling. Correlations
for heat transfer coefficient and friction factor. Classification and
MCL813 Computational Heat Transfer
types of heat exchangers and construction details. Design and rating
4 Credits (3-0-2) of double pipe heat exchangers, shell and tube heat exchangers,
Mathematical Description of the Physical Phenomena- Governing compact heat exchangers, plate and heat pipe type, condensers,
equations—mass, momentum, energy, species, General form of the cooling towers. Heat exchanger standards and testing,Heat transfer
scalar transport equation, Elliptic, parabolic and hyperbolic equations. enhancement and efficient surfaces.
Discretization Methods- Introduction to finite difference and finite
volume method, Consistency, stability and convergence. MCL818 Heating, Ventilating and Air-conditioning
Diffusion Equation- 1D-2D steady diffusion, Source terms, non- 3 Credits (3-0-2)
linearity, Boundary conditions, interface diffusion coefficient, Under- Introduction, psychrometry of airconditioning processes. HVAC
relaxation, Solution of linear equations (preliminary), Unsteady technologies. Thermal comfort - factors influencing thermal comfort.
diffusion, Explicit, Implicit and Crank-Nicolson scheme. Cooling and Heating load calculations. Room air distribution principles.
Convection and Diffusion- Steady one-dimensional convection and Design of air duct systems.
diffusion, Upwind, exponential, hybrid, power, QUICK scheme, Two- Indoor air quality. Ventilation - need, principles. Various types of air
dimensional convection-diffusion. conditioning systems. Cooling, dehumidification and humidification
Flow Field Calculation- Incompressibility issues and pressure-velocity equipment. Temperature, pressure and humidity controllers. Various
coupling, Primitive variable versus other methods, Vorticity-stream types of controls and control strategies.
function formulation, Staggered grid, SIMPLE family of algorithms.
Radiative heat transfer - Computation of surface radiation using zone MCL819 Lattice Boltzmann Method
method, Solution of radiative transfer equation using discrete transfer, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
discrete ordinates and finite volume methods.
Introduction, Kinetic theory and statistical mechanics, Lattice gas
cellular automata, LBM, Thermal LBM, Boundary conditions, Body
MCL814 Convective Heat Transfer
forces, Multiple relaxation time model, Single component multiphase
3 Credits (3-0-0) models, Multicomponent models single phase models, Applications
Derivation of energy equation-Similarity solutions for laminar of LBM.
292

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Mechanical Engineering
MCL820 Micro/Nano Scale Heat Transfer radial flow compressors, operation and performance of compressors,
4 Credits (3-0-2) compressor cascades, blade to blade flow for axial compressors with
subsonic inlet flow, blade-to-blade flow for axial flow compressors
Introduction to micro/nano scale transport phenomena, size effect
with supersonic inlet flow, loss correlations, performance analysis
behaviour, overview of engg. applications, fundamentals of micro/
of axial flow compressors, Centrifugal compressor - the centrifugal
nano scale fluid mechanics and heat transfer – kinetic theory, quantum
impeller, diffuser of centrifugal compressor, stall and surge, supersonic
mechanics considerations, Boltzmann transport equation, molecular
compressors, compressor instrumentation and testing.
dynamics modelling, microfluidics, Knudsen number, slip theory,
micro/nano scale heat conduction - classical/quantum size effects,
MCL825 Design of Wind power Farms
thermal conductivity models, specific heat, thin films, convection
in microtubes and channels, nanoparticles and nanofluids – 4 Credits (3-0-2)
preparation & transport properties, microfluidics - electrokinetic General Introduction to Wind Turbines, Analysis of wind source, 2-D
flows, microscale radiative heat transfer – modelling, properties, Aerodynamics, 3-D Aerodynamics, Momentum Theory for an Ideal
measurements at microscale. Wind Turbine, wind turbine performance, Design of HAWT, Design of
VAWT, Component sizing, Analysis and design of wind farms, Optimal
MCL821 Radiative Heat Transfer selection of layouts.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
MCL826 Introduction to Microfluidics
Introduction to Radiation- Recapitulation: Radiative properties of
opaque surfaces, Intensity, emissive power, radiosity, Planck’s law, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Wien’s displacement law, Black and Gray surfaces, View factors. Pre-requisite(s): APL106 and MCL242 or their equivalents for
Enclosure with Transparent Medium- Enclosure analysis for diffuse- UG students only
gray surfaces and non-diffuse, non-gray surfaces, net radiation
Micro-and nano-scale flow fundamentals: molecular basis of fluid
method.
mechanics and transport processes, scaling laws for microfluidics,
Radiative heat transfer in Participating Medium- Radiation in microfabrication Flows with low inertia: flow past bodies, lubrication
absorbing, emitting and scattering media. Absorption, scattering and theory, Hele Shaw flows, steady/unsteady parallel flows Interfacial
extinction coefficients, Radiative transfer equation. Analytical solution phenomena: wetting, capillary effects, super-hydrophobic surfaces,
of radiative transfer equation. electro-wetting, thermo-/solute-capillary effects, hydrodynamic
Introduction to different radiation model- Discrete transfer method, slippage in liquids, Internal flows in rarefied gas dynamics, Diffusion,
discrete ordinates method Radiation from particulate media, unsteady convective mass transfer (Taylor-Aris dispersion), ion-
Dependent versus independent scattering Non-gray radiation, transport in dilute solutions, absorption, mixing, thermal effects,
Modelling of non-gray radiation. Transient radiation and its solution. electrical double layers and the Poisson-Boltzmann equation,
Radiative transfer in porous media. Combined Heat Transfer Modes- Electrohydrodyanmics in dilute electrolyte solutions Electrokinetic
Radiation with conduction, combined boundary layer. transport phenomena: electro-osmosis and electrophoresis
MCL822 Steam and Gas Turbines MCS830 Independent Study
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (0-3-0)
Introduction, Recapitulation of heat cycles of steam power plants
and gas turbine engines,Thermodynamics and fluid dynamics of MCD3831 Major project part-I
compressible flow through turbines, meanline analysis and design 6 Credits (0-0-12)
of axial flow turbines,Three dimensional flows in axial flow turbines,
Partial admission turbines, Turbines for nuclear power plants, Steam
MCD832 Major project part-II
turbines for co-generation, turbine for super critical thermal power
plant, operation of turbine plants- start up and shut-down of a turbine, 12 Credits (0-0-24)
steady state operation.
MCL834 Vibroacoustics
MCL823 Thermal Design 3 Credits (2-0-2)
4 Credits (3-0-2) Excitation of vibrations, Wave types in fluids and solids. Modes of
Introduction to design, modelling and simulation, components vibrations in solids. The mobility and impedance concepts, for beams
and systems. Component design. Design of heat sink - single fin and plates. Wave/boundary matching. Radiation and transmission:
optimization, multiple fin array. Design of compact heat exchangers - Acoustical radiation from structures. Transmission between
Fundamentals, shell and tube heat exchangers, plate heat exchangers, structures. Fluid structure interaction: Fundamentals of fluid structure
finned tube heat exchangers. Design of Heat pipe - Fundamentals, interaction. Vibroacoustic Coupling: Effects of fluid-loading on
design procedure. Design of thermoelectric devices - Fundamentals, vibrating infinite and finite plates and shells. Acoustic reflection from
thermoelectric generator, thermoelectric cooler, module design. elastic plates and shells, acoustic excitation of elastic plates and
System Design: coupling between panels and acoustic spaces. Prediction models,
Sound transmission loss of structures. Enclosures: Acoustic fields
Design of thermal systems: System identification and description with
in enclosures, low- and high-modal density fields, Sound-isolation
mathematical modelling: Examples with Power plant, refrigeration
techniques. Numerical models and analysis use of FEM, BEM.
plant, HVAC systems, pump pipe network, electric space heaters,
Vibroacoustic condition monitoring, Source identification and fault
wind tunnel.
detection from noise and vibration signals in Mechanical systems
Development of a numerical model, mathematical techniques, solution
such as bearings, gears, fans, blower and pumps, electrical
of non-linear equations, numerical model for a system, system
equipment etc.
simulation, methods of numerical simulation.
Optimization - basic concepts, optimization of thermal systems, MCL837 Advanced Mechanisms
Lagrange multiplier, optimization of unconstrained problems, search
3 Credits (2-0-2)
based methods, Genetic algorithm, Differential Evolution method.
Review of mechanism analysis and synthesis through inversion.
Thermal design based on inverse methods - Definition, estimation of
Design of parallel guidance systems, coupler curves with symmetry,
boundary condition, conjugate gradient method.
cusps and crossings. Curvature theory, Euler-Savary Equations
and applications. Homogenous coordinate representation of
MCL824 Turbocompressors
curves, coupler curves analysis and systhesis. Kinematic of spatial
3 Credits (3-0-0) mechanisms, DH representation. Four points synthesis methods,
Introduction, Fluid mechanics and thermodynamics of axial and circle and center point curves, branch and order defect rectification.
293

Mechanical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Compliant implementation of mechanism designs: short cantilever Engineering materials selection in mechanical design: Stages of
and long cantilever designs, folded sheet flexures and hole-hinges design, stiffness / strength based design, damage tolerant design, life
based implementation. cycle design, systems approach to materials selection etc.
Tribo-systems design.
MCL 839 Rotor Dynamics
Elecro-mechanical machines etc.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Distinction between rigid and flexible rotors, vibration response to
MCL849 Special topics in Systems Design-II
steady state and transient excitations, bending critical speeds and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
response to unbalance for simple and complex rotor bearing system,
orbital analysis and cascade plots, critical speed map, Campbell The course topic(s) will be decided by the department for each
diagram. Disc gyro-scopics, synchronous and nonsynchronous whirl, semester this course will be offered depending on the expertise
review of fluid film bearings and seals, analysis of rotors mounted on available. Generally, each time a theme topic will be selected and
hydrodynamic bear-ings, two spool and multispool rotors, asymmetric students will work on all aspects of system design for that theme
rotors, bent rotors, etc. Parametric excitations including that in topic. Theme topic can be parts of aircraft design, automotive design,
rolling element bearings, instabili-ties due to fluid film forces and robotic design, energy system, biomedical equipment etc.
hysterisis, influence of nonlinear sup-ports, seals and bearings on
rotor dynamic response. Instability in rotor bearing systems, sources MCV849 Special Module in System Design
of instability and basic ap-proaches to avoid instability conditions 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Balancing techniques, such as rigid rotor balancing, modal balancing, Basic terminology and concept of human musculoskeletal system,
etc. Introduction to smart rotor systems. Use of finite element anatomy and overall function; Mechanical behavior of biological
based ap-proach for solving rotor dynamic problems. Application of tissues: bone, articular cartilage, muscle, tendon and ligament;
vibration based condition monitorings, signal processing for rotor fault Motion and gait analysis – method, gait cycle, segmental kinetics,
identification, application of expert systems for automated condition engineering approaches to posture analysis; Joint replacement and
monitoring, remote monitoring and other commercial systems. The fracture fixation – basic design approach.
course involves extensive coding in Matlab for dynamic response
analysis of a general rotor bearing system. The course involves MCD861 M.Tech. project part-I
experi-mentation on Machinery Fault Simulator.
12 Credits (0-0-24)
MCL840 Experimental Modal Analysis and Dynamic
Design MCD862 M.Tech. project part-II
12 Credits (0-0-24)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Introduction to modal testing. Dynamic test data measurement and
MCL865 Advanced Operations Research
processing methods including Laser vibrometery. Frequency response
3 Credits (3-0-0)
functions for multi-degree of- freedoms systems, forced response.
Experimental and theoretical modal analysis - algorithms and codes. Advanced Linear Programming and Simplex Method, Advanced
Applications of modal testing in system and force identification, Dynamic Programming, Integer Programming - Branch and Bound,
structural dynamic modification, sensitivity analysis and frequency Branch and Cut, Interior Point Methods, Selected Topics in Applied
response coupling of substructure etc. Introduction to non-linear Probability, Applications.
vibration analysis. Introduction to discrete systems and finite element
modeling. Approaches to Joint modeling. Numerical model correlation; MCL866 Maintenance management
Introduction to FE model updating; Direct and iterative methods of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
FE model updating including optimization based updating; Brief idea
Introduction to maintenance management, Reliability basics,
of operational Modal Analysis, frequency and time domain methods
Asset criticality Analysis, Reliability centered maintenance, Basic
of Operational Modal Analysis; Dynamic design of structures of
maintenance models for age and time based replacement, block
products, machines and equipment via model testing, structural
and group replacement, inspection and shock based replacement,
dynamic modification and FE model updating.
imperfect maintenance models, Maintainability models, Availability
models, Life cycle cost models, Simulation based approach for
MCL845 Advanced Robotics
maintenance planning, Queuing models for maintenance planning,
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Models for condition monitoring, Models for Maintenance scheduling,
Review of different robotic systems; Types of wheeled mobile robots Maintenance performance measurement, Asset management
and walking machines; Jacobian; Forward and inverse kinematic practices, Case studies.
algorithms; Non-recursive and recursive dynamic algorithms;
Dynamics of mobile robots and walking machines; Kinematic design
MCD881 Major project part-I
of robotic systems based on singularity, manipulability, etc.; Control
of robots. Mechanical design of links. 6 Credits (0-0-12)
MCL848 Special topics in Systems Design-I
MCD882 Major project part-II
2 Credits (2-0-0)
12 Credits (0-0-24)
Some sample topics are given below and depending upon the
availability of experts, the department will decide the topic for a
given semester: MCD895 MS Research project
Design of aircraft fuselage and wing. 36 Credits (0-0-72)
294

Department of physics
pYL101 Electromagnetism & Quantum Mechanics pYp111 Engineering physics Laboratory-I
4 Credits (3-1-0) 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Electromagnetism: Vector analysis, Electric and magnetic fields in Experiments with various Lasers, Optical spectrometer, Microwaves,
media, Susceptibility and ohmic Conductivity, Maxwell’s relations, Fundamentals of Quantum Mechanics, Atomic spectroscopyand
interface conditions, EM wave equation, plane wave solutions, Tunneling.
polarization of EM waves, Poynting vector and intensity, wave packets,
phase and group velocities, reflection and refraction at dielectric pYL121 Mathematical physics I
interfaces, Brewster’s angle, and total internal reflection. 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Quantum Mechanics: Wave-particle duality, de-Brogile waves, Probability theory and Statistics, Vector Spaces and Linear Algebra,
quantum mechanical operators, Schrodinger equation, wave function, Complex Analysis, Fourier Series, Fourier and Laplace transforms and
statistical interpretation, superposition principle, continuity equation their applications to ODEs, Green's Functions and their applications
for probability density, stationary states, bound states, free-particle to ODEs, Calculus of variation.
solution, 1-D infinite potential well, expectation values and uncertainty
relations, 1-D finite potential well, and quantum mechanical pYL122 Quantum Mechanics
tunnelling and alpha-decay. 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Dirac’s bra-ket algebra, projection operator. Matrix representation of
pYp100 physics Laboratory vectors and operators. Reformulating postulates in bra-ket language,
Examples. 1D harmonic oscillator, ladder operators and construction
2 Credits (0-0-4)
of the stationary state wave functions, number operator and its
Experiments based on Design and Study of Power sources, Charging
eigenstates. Quantum mechanics in 2 and 3 dimensions in Cartesian
and discharging of a capacitor, Electromagnetic Induction, Phase
coordinates. Quantum theory of angular momentum, eigenvalues and
Measurement. Experiments on geometrical and wave optics including
eigenfunctions. Quantum theory of spin angular momentum, addition
interference, diffraction, dispersion and polarization. Experiments
of angular momenta and Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Schroedinger
based on mechanics, heat, sound, fluids, resonance, like linear
equation in spherical coordinates, Free particle solution and solutions
air track, coupled pendulum and oscillators, thermal conductivity,
for spherically symmetric potentials, Hydrogen atom. Many particle
elasticity. Experiments in the area of modern physics, like Planck’s
Schroedinger equation, independent particles and reduction to the
constant, lasers, semiconductor band gap, wave motion, mechanical
system of single-particle equations. Identical particles, exchange
transmission lines.
symmetry and degeneracy, Pauli principle and its applications. EPR
paradox, Entangled states, hidden variables, Bell’s inequality.
pYL102 principles of Electronic Materials pYL123 Optics and photonics-I
3 Credits (3-0-0) 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL101 Geometrical Optics: Fermat’s Principle, Ray equation and its solutions.
Applications in fibre optics, mirage formation, etc. Wave Propagation:
(Program Linked Course: Not available to B.Tech. (Engineering
Review of Maxwell’s equations and propagation of waves, Plane
Physics) students)
polarized light. Reflection and refraction of e. m. wave, Brewster
Energy bands in solids(KP model), Classification of electronic
angle; total internal reflection and evanescent waves. Reflection by
materials: metals, semiconductors and insulators. Free electron
a conducting medium. Anisotropic Media: Plane waves in anisotropic
model, Conductivity in metals and Concepts of Fermi level, effective
media, Birefringence, Uniaxial crystals; Analysis of polarized light;
mass and holes, Concept of phonons, Thermoelectricity, Intrinsic,
some polarization devices. Interference: Interference by division of
extrinsic and degenerate semiconductors, Fermi level variation
wavefront and division of amplitude; Phase change on reflection,
by carrier concentration and temperature, Metal-semiconductor
Stoke’s relations; Reflecting and nonreflecting films; Colors of thin
junction, p-n junction, Diffusion and drift transport, carrier life
films. Michelson interferometer; Fabry-Perot interferometer and
time and diffusion length; Direct and indirect band gaps, Optical
etalon, some applications. Diffraction: Fresnel and Fraunhofer
transitions, photon absorption, Exciton, photovoltaic effect,
diffraction. Single slit, circular aperture; limit of resolution. Double
Dielectrics and electrical polarization, Depolarization field, Clausius-
slit, Diffraction grating, Resolving power. Fresnel half-period zones and
Mossotti relation; Drude model, Electronic polarization and its
the zone plate. Diffraction of a Gaussian beam. Fourier Optics: Fourier
mechanisms, Dielectric breakdown; Piezoelectricity, Pyroelectricity
transform operation spatial frequency and transmittance function,
and Ferroelectricity; Magnetism in materials – types of interactions,
spatial-frequency filtering, Phase contrast microscope. Holography:
Magnetic susceptibility, Curie and Neel temperatures; Domains,
Principle of holography, On-axis and Off-axis hologram recording and
Magnetic anisotropies, Spin-orbit interaction.
reconstruction, types of hologram and some applications.
pYL125 Solid State physics-I
pYL105 Optics and Lasers
4 Credits (3-1-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Crystal Structure, concepts of reciprocal lattice, Weigner Seitz
Pre-requisite(s): PYL101 cell, Energy Bonds, Defects in Crystals, Phonons, Crystal Vibration
(Program linked course: Not available to B.Tech. (Engineering with monoatomic and diatomic basis, M-B, B-E and F-D statistics,
Phonon Heat Capacity: Density of states in one dimension, Debye
Physics) students)
and Einstein Models, thermal expansion, free Electron Fermi Gas,
Basic optics: Interference and interferometers, phase change on
Effect of temperature on the Fermi-Dirac Distribution, E-k diagrams,
reflection, anti-reflection film; Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction
Effective Mass, Nearly free electron model, Bloch function, Kronig
and examples, limit of resolution, diffraction grating, resolving
Penny Model, Brillouin zone, Tight binding approximation, Energy
power. Polarization optics, examples and applications. Lasers: Laser
bands in semiconductor, Equilibrium distribution, carrier and transport,
principles, interaction of radiation and matter, amplification and
thermoelectric effect.
resonator conditions for laser oscillation, modes of laser, some laser
systems and applications. Fiber optics: Light propagation in optical
pYL127 Classical Mechanics & Relativity
fibers, fiber communication, attenuation and dispersion, single and
multi-mode fibers, fiber amplifiers and lasers, fiber optic sensors. 4 Credits (3-1-0)
Fourier Optics and Holography: Basics of Fourier transformation, Dynamics of a particle moving under Central Force, Canonical
spatial frequency, spatial filtering and some applications; Holographic transformation and Poission bracket formulation, Hamilton-
principles, on-axis and off-axis holograms, types of holograms and Jacobi’s theory, Non inertial (rotating) frames of references,
some applications. Relativistic Mechanics.
295

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
pYL202 Statistical physics pYL209 Optics and photonics-II
4 Credits (3-1-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL122 Lasers: interaction of radiation and matter, Einstein coefficients,
condition for amplification. Optical resonators, Condition for laser
Elementary Probability Theory: Binomial, Poisson and Gaussian
oscillation. Longitudinal and transverse modes of a laser. Some Laser
Distribution, random walk problem, central limit theorem and its
Systems. Fiber Optics: Light propagation in optical fibers, Attenuation
significance, average and distributions; diffusion and Brownian motion
and dispersion; Single-mode fibers, material dispersion. Optical
and their relation to random walk problem; Macrostate and microstate,
fiber communication, Fiber amplifiers and lasers. Optical fibers in
Postulates of Statistical Mechanics, rules of calculations through
sensing. Electro-Optic (E.O) Effect: Phase-and amplitude modulators.
microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles; Derivation
E.O. effect in liquid crystals; LCDs and SLMs. Magneto-optic effect:
of the thermodynamic relations from the statistical mechanics ;
Faraday rotation. Acousto-Optic (A.O.) Effect: Raman-Nath and Bragg
Application to classical systems: Systems of ideal gas molecules,
diffraction; A.O. modulators and deflectors. Nonlinear Optics: Second
Maxwell Boltzmann velocity distribution, paramagnetism of non
order and third order effects, Phase-matching schemes. Self-phase
interacting spins; specific heat of solids; Concept of Thermodynamic
modulation and optical solitons; Cross phase modulation and four
stability and Phase Transition: Vander Waal equation of state,
wave mixing. Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) and stimulated
Ising model, critical exponents; Indistinguishability of particles
Brillouin scattering (SBS) Quantum Optics: Quantum states of light
and Quantum Statistical Mechanics; Bose Einstein and Fermi-Dirac
and their properties, Generation and detection of quantum light
distribution: Black Body radiation, Bose Einstein Condensation, Fermi
Entanglement and its applications: quantum computing, cryptography
level and electronic contribution to specific heat, White Dwarf stars
and teleportation.
and Chandrasekhar Limit.
pYL204 Computational physics pYp212 Engineering physics Laboratory-II
4 Credits (3-1-0) 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL113 Pre-requisite(s): PYL115
Introduction to the basic numerical tools, such as locating roots of Characterisation of optoelectronic/semiconductor devices, Holography,
equations, interpolation, numerical differentiation and integration, Determination of characteristic parameters of different types of
solutions of algebraic and differential equations, discrete Fourier optical fibers, Applications of Fiber Optics: experiments related to
transform, etc. Applications of Monte-Carlo simulations, optimization communication and sensors.
and variational methods etc. to problems of interest in multiple areas
of Physics. pYp223 Engineering physics Laboratory-III
3 Credits (0-0-6)
pYL205 Electrodynamics
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Synthesis of thin films, multilayers, nanoparticles by physical and
Electrostatics and magnetostatics. Laplace and Poisson equations chemical vapor deposition techniques, phase diagrams, study of
(solution), method of images. Multipole expansion. Maxwell’s surface, design of thin film resistor and magnetic field sensor.
equations. Wave equation. Frequency dependence of permittivity.
Absorption and dispersion. Kramers-Kronig relations. Conservation pYp224 Engineering physics Laboratory-IV
laws: Continuity equation, Poynting theorem, stress-energy tensor
3 Credits (0-0-6)
and Conservation of momentum. Solutions of Maxwell’s equations in
terms of potentials. Gauge transformations. Continuous distribution Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
and retarded potentials. Lienard-Wiechert potentials. Field of moving Resistivity of metals and semiconductors, band gap, charge carrier
point charge. Radiation, Electric dipole radiation, magnetic dipole density and mobilities of semiconductor, basics of junction diode and
radiation, Radiation from an arbitrary source. Power radiated by a its characteristics in solar cell configuration, study of crystal structure,
point charge. Radiation reaction. Four vectors, Transformations of dielectric constant, specific heat and superconductivity.
four vectors and tensors under Lorentz transformations. Formulation
of Maxwell’s equations in relativistic notations. Transformations of pYS 300 Independent Study
electric and the magnetic field vectors. Magnetism as a relativistic
3 Credits (0-3-0)
phenomenon. Lagrangian formulation of the electromagnetic field
The course details to be worked out by the faculty giving the course
equations. Euler-Lagrange equations.
keeping in view the learning needs of the students.
pYL206 Mathematical physics-II
pYL 301 Vacuum Technology and Surface Science
4 Credits (3-1-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL121
Need of Vacuum and basic concepts: Mean free path, Particle flux;
Introduction to partial differential equations, vector and tensor analysis,
Monolayer formation, Gas Flow regimes ; Gas release from Solids:
special functions, Integral equations, Introduction to group theory.
Vaporization, Thermal Desorption, Permeation, Surface diffusion,
Physisorption and Chemisorption; Measurement of Pressure:
pYL208 Solid State physics-II
Gauges, Residual Gas Analyses; Production of Vacuum: Roughing -
3 Credits (3-0-0) Rotary pumps, Oil free pumps; HV & UHV - Turbomolecular pumps,
Dielectric Properties of insulators: Depolarization Field, Local electric Cryopumps, Getter and Sputter Ion pumps; Materials and components
field at an atom, Dielectric Constant and Polarizability, Clausius in vacuum; Bulk versus surface; Electronic properties of surfaces:
Mossotti relation, Kramers-Kronig relations, dielectric strength and Contact potential and work function, Surface Plasmons; Atomic
insulation breakdown. Structural phase transition: Landau Theory motion: Surface lattice dynamics, Surface diffusion, Surface melting
of Phase transition, Piezo, Ferro and Pyro electricity. Atomic origin and chemisorption; Adsorption of atoms and molecules; Experimental
of magnetism: Diamagnetism, Langevin theory of paramagnetism, techniques for surface analysis: XPS, AES, SEXAFS, TEM, SEM, STM,
Curie-Weiss Law, Ferromagnetism, Weiss molecular theory, AFM and RHEED.
Ferromagnetic domains, magnetic anisotropy, Band theory of
Ferrimagnetism. Superconductivity, types of superconductors, Heat pYL302 Nuclear Science and Engineering
capacity, energy gap, Thermodynamics of the superconducting
3 Credits (3-0-0)
transition, London equation, coherence length, BCS theory of
superconductivity (qualitative), Brief introduction to high temperature Pre-requisite(s): PYL122
superconductors. Introduction to nuclear structure, Radioactivity and applications,
296

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
Nuclear detection and acceleration technology, Nuclear reactors Energy enhanced processes for low temperature processing,
engineering, Nuclear techniques for composition analysis, Nuclear Reactive sputtering, Ion-beam deposition, Pulsed Laser Deposition,
radiation in biology. Plasma etching, E-beam and Ion-beam patterning, Chemical Vapor
Deposition, Chemical Bath Deposition and Electrodeposition, Chemical
pYL303 Materials Science and Engineering
epitaxy, Need for Epitaxy and its role in semiconductor devices,
3 Credits (3-0-0) quantum wells, superlattices and hybrid structures. Mechanisms for
confined materials growth for 0-D, 1-D and 2-D architecture and other
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
complex forms, Case studies of material design by taking examples
Elementary materials science concepts, thermally activated
from current and emerging aspects of technologies and applications.
processes, diffusion in solids, phase diagram of pure substances,
Gibbs phase rule, binary isomorphous systems, the Lever rule, zone pYL311 Lasers
refining, homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, martensitic
3 Credits (3-0-0)
transformation & spinodal decomposition, Temperature dependence
of resistivity,Matthiessen’s rule, TCR, Nordheim’s rule, mixture rules Pre-requisite(s): PYL123
and electrical switches, high frequency resistance of a conductor, thin Interaction of Radiation with Matter: Einstein coefficients; Line shape
metal films and integrated circuit inter-connections, thermoelectricity, function, Line-broadening mechanisms, Condition for amplification by
seebeck, Thomson and Peltier effects, thermoelectric heating and stimulated emission, the meta-stable state and laser action. 3-level
refrigeration, thermoelectric generators, the figure of merit, Bonding and 4-level pumping schemes. Laser Rate Equations: Two-, three-
characteristics and elastic modulii, anelasticity, thermoelasticity, and four-level laser systems, condition for population inversion,
anelasticity energy losses, viscoelastic deformation, displacement gain saturation; Laser amplifiers; Rare earth doped fiber amplifiers.
models, Corrosion and Degradation of Materials: Electrochemical Optical Resonators: Modes of a rectangular cavity, Plane mirror
considerations, corrosion rates and their prediction, passivity resonators, spherical mirror resonators, ray paths in the resonator,
environmental effects, forms of corrosiion, corrosion environments, stable and unstable resonators, resonator stability condition; ring
corrosion prevention, oxidation, protective and non-protective resonators; Transverse modes of laser resonators. Gaussian beams
oxides, PB ratio, mechanisms of oxide growth, Materials Selection in laser resonators. Laser Oscillation: Optical feedback, threshold
and Design Considerations. condition, variation of laser power near threshold, optimum output
coupling, Characteristics of the laser output, oscillation frequency,
pYL304 Superconductivity and Applications
frequency pulling, hole burning and the Lamb dip; Mode selection,
3 Credits (3-0-0) single-frequency lasers; Methods of pulsing lasers, Q-switching,
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125 mode-locking. Some Laser Systems: Ruby, Nd: YAG, He-Ne, CO2
and excimer lasers, Tunable lasers: Ti Sapphire and dye lasers, Fiber
Basic properties: zero resistance, perfect diamagnetism, difference
lasers, Semiconductor lasers; Laser safety.
from perfect conductors; Critical temperature, Basic Introduction
to High Temperature superconductors, Meissner effect, London
pYL312 Semiconductor Optoelectronics
equations, penetration depth, flux quantization, critical current and
critical magnetic field, Thermodynamics of superconducting state, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Type I and Type II superconductors, BCS theory, electron pairs; Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
coherence length; energy gap; Isotope effect, Ginzburg-Landau
Energy bands in solids, density of states, occupation probability,
Theory, tunneling of electron in M/I/S, tunneling of electron pairs in
Fermi level and quasi Fermi levels, p-n junctions, Semiconductor
S/I/S: DC and AC Josephson effect, Some applications: Electromagnet,
optoelectronic materials, bandgap modification, Heterostructures
SQUID, Oscillators, basics of superconducting electronics and
and Quantum Wells. Rates of emission and absorption, condition
superconducting quantum computing.
for amplification by stimulated emission, the laser amplifier.
Semiconductor Photon Sources: Electroluminescence. The LED,
pYL305 Engineering Applications of plasmas
Semiconductor Laser, Single-frequency lasers; DFB and DBR lasers,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
VCSEL; Quantum-well lasers and quantum cascade lasers. Laser diode
Pre-requisite(s): PYL205 arrays. Semiconductor optical amplifiers (SOA), Electro-absorption
Plasma processing of materials, surface cleaning, etching, power/ modulators based on FKE and QCSE. Semiconductor Photodetectors:
fusion energy, coherent radiation generation, plasma processing of Types of photodetectors, Photoconductors, Photodiodes, PIN diodes
textiles, nitriding, surface modification, plasma based charged particle and APDs. Quantum well infrared photodetectors (QWIP); Noise in
accelerators, Hall thrusters. photodetection; Photonic integrated circuits (PICs).
pYL306 Microelectronic Devices pYL313 Fourier Optics and Holography
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125 Pre-requisite(s): PYL123
Brief overview of semiconductor fundamentals; pn junction diode - Signals and systems, Fourier transform (FT), FT theorems, sampling
energy-band diagrams, electrostatics, current - voltage relationship, theorem, Space-bandwidth product; Review of diffraction theory:
junction-breakdown mechanisms. Metal-semiconductor contacts: Fresnel-Kirchhoff formulation, Fresnel and Fraunhofer Diffraction
Schottky barrier diode, C-V and I-V characteristics of Schottky diode; and angular spectrum method, FT properties of lenses and image
ohmic contacts in semiconductors. MOS structure: Accumulation, formation by a lens; Frequency response of a diffraction-limited
depletion and inversion modes of operation, charge - voltage and system under coherent and incoherent illumination. Basics of
capacitance - voltage behaviour, threshold and flatband voltages, holography, in-line and off-axis holography, plane and volume
fixed oxide and interface charge effects. MOSFET: Output and holograms, diffraction efficiency; Recording medium for holograms;
transfer characteristics, I-V relations, nonideal effects, MOSFET Applications of holography: display, microscopy; memories,
scaling. BJT: BJT action, current gain factors, modes of operation, I-V interferometry, NDT of engineering objects, Digital Holography etc.;
characteristics of a BJT, non-ideal effects, cutoff frequency of a BJT. Holographic optical elements. Analog optical information processing:
Abbe-Porter experiment, phase contrast microscopy and other simple
pYL307 Elements of Material processing applications; Coherent image processing: vander Lugt filter; joint-
transform correlator; pattern recognition, image restoration.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fundamentals of thermodynamic and kinetic aspects during nucleation pYL321 Low Dimensional physics
and growth processes, Film growth modes, 2-D growth, Epitaxy
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and lattice misfits, Molecular beam epitaxy, Basics of vacuum,
plasma discharge and sputtering, importance for material growth, Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
297

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
Brief overview of band structure and density of states function for pYL332 General Theory of Relativity & Cosmology
0D, 1D and 2D systems, band gap engineetring and semiconductor 3 Credits (3-0-0)
heterostructures. Quantum wells and their optical properties, multiple
quantum wells and superlattices, Bloch oscillations. Two dimensional Pre-requisite(s): PYL127
electron gas, modulation doped heterostructures, Quantum Hall Revision of special relativity, Notations, Equivalence principle,
effect. Quantum wires and nanowires, electronic transport, properties Introduction to tensor calculus, Metric, Parallel transport, covariant
and applications. Quantum dots and their optical properties, Coulomb derivative and Christoffel symbols, Geodesic, Riemann curvature
blockade. Device applications of low dimensional systems: Double tensor, Ricci tensor, Geodesic deviation equation, Stress-Energy
heterostructure laser, quantum cascade laser, high electron mobility tensor, Einstein equation, Meaning of Einstein equation, Schwarzschild
transistors. 2D materials: Graphene, topological insulators, WS2 / solution, Trajectories in Schwarzschild space-time, Perihelion shift,
MoS2and their properties. Binary pulsars, Gravitational deflection of light, Gravitational lensing,
Gravitational collapse, Black holes, Hawking Radiation, Gravitational
pYL322 Nanoscale Fabrication waves, Cosmology: Models of the universe and the cosmological
3 Credits (3-0-0) principle, Cosmological metrics, Types of universe, Robertson-Walker
universes, Big Bang, Dark energy.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
Nucleation and growth, Basic principles involved in growth with
pYD411 project-I
controllable dimensions, Chemical and physical techniques for
4 Credits (0-0-8)
growth of nanoparticle, nanorod, ultrathin films, monolayer materials,
multilayer structures, nanocomposite materials. Self organized To set the objectives, deliverables, work plan, logistics planning and
growth on substrates and templates. Micro and nanoscale pattering milestones with discernible outputs, and to demonstrate the feasibility
techniques. through some specific aspects of a project.
pYL323 Nanoscale Microscopy pYL411 Quantum Electronics
2 Credits (2-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125 Pre-requisite(s): PYL122
Scanning probe microscopy such as scanning electron microscope, Light propagation though anisotropic media, nonlinear effects,
atomic force microscope, scanning electron micoscope. Transmission nonlinear polarization, Second harmonic generation, sum and
electron microscope with high resolution and near field optical difference frequency generation, parametric amplification, parametric
microscopy. fluorescence and oscillation, concept of quasi-phase matching;
periodically poled materials and their applications. Third-order effects:
pYL324 Spectroscopy of Nanomaterials self-phase modulations, temporal and spatial solitons, cross-phase
modulation, stimulated Raman and Brilloun scattering, four-wave
2 Credits (2-0-0)
mixing, phase conjugation. Quantization of the electromagnetic
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125 field; number states, coherent states and their properties: squeezed
Absorption and Reflection spectroscopy, molecular spectroscopy states of light and their properties, application of optical parametric
fundamentals, band-gaps and quantum confinement effects, processes to generate squeezed states of light, entangled states and
Photoluminescence and Electroluminescence spectroscopy: Origin of their properties; Generation of entangled states; Quantum eraser,
emissions, Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy: Vibration spectroscopy Ghost interference effects; Applications in quantum information
principles , Time-domain spectroscopy, Nonlinear optical spectroscopy, science. Ultra-intense laser-matter interactions.
Single molecule single nanoparticle detection. X-Ray Diffraction:
Overview of basics, Intensities of diffracted beams, structure of pYD412 project-II
polycrystalline aggregates, determination of crystallite size. X-Ray
8 Credits (0-0-16)
Absorption Spectroscopy: Fundamentals, Qualitative analysis of
XANES and EXAFS data. X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy and Pre-requisite(s): PYD 411
Auger Electron Spectroscopy: Principles of the method, initial- and Open to only those students opting for Departmental Specialization.
final-state effects, Applications and case studies using all techniques The Project can be a continuation of the project undertaken for PYD
specific to nanomaterials, Introduction to synchrotron radiation and 411. The students will be eligible to do this project, if he/she secures
its application to study nanomaterials. a grade not below B in PYD411.
pYL331 Applied Quantum Mechanics pYL412 Ultrafast Laser Systems and Applications
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL122 Pre-requisite(s): PYL311
Electron in a magnetic field, Landau levels, Quantum Hall effect, Review of Laser Physics: Gain media, laser oscillation, spectral
Aharonov-Bohm effect. Non-degenerate and Degenerate Time- line broadening, mode selection, Q-switching and mode-locking.
independent perturbation theory, Examples: Stark effect, Atomic Generation of Ultrashort Pulses: Temporal, spectral and spatial
fine-structure, Atomic Hyperfine-structure, Zeeman Effect. Variational properties of pulses, Group velocity dispersion, Self-phase
method, Examples, WKB Approximation, Examples and comparison. modulation; Pulse chirping, broadening and compression; Optical
Time-dependent Perturbation theory, Examples, Fermi Golden Rule. solitons, Chirp filters; High repetition-rate, high-energy few-cycle
Interaction of radiation with matter: Absorption and emission of pulses. Measurement of Ultrashort Pulses: Optical and electronic
radiation, Selection rules. Scattering theory: Scattering amplitude, pulse profiling; Intensity autocorrelation; Spectral measurement and
Differential and total cross-sections, Born’s Approximation, Scattering frequency gating, FROG; Spectral interferometry, SPIDER. Ultrafast
by spherically symmetric potentials, Examples, Rutherford’s formula Optical Processes: Higher harmonic generation, Supercontinuum
for Coulomb scattering, Partial wave analysis and Optical theorem, generation, Attosecond generation, Ultra-wideband optical parametric
Examples. Relativistic Quantum Mechanics: Klein-Gordon equation, amplification. Femtosecond Laser Systems: Solid-state laser and fiber
Properties of the free-particle KG equation including negative energy laser based systems, next-generation mid-IR lasers. Ultrafast Laser
solutions. Dirac equation: The Dirac matrices and Dirac algebra. Processing: Laser ablation and surface micro/nano-structuring, Laser
Spin of the Dirac particle. Dirac particle in an electromagnetic field, inscription of photonic devices, fabrication of optical waveguides and
including the Pauli equation, magnetic moment and the g-factor, micro-fluidic chips. Ultrafast Spectroscopy: Transient absorption and
Free particle plane wave solutions, including negative and positive emission spectroscopy, Terahertz spectroscopy; Femtosecond optical
energy solutions. frequency combs and their applications.
298

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
pYL413 Fiber and Integrated Optics anisotropies and exchange bias, Spin valves with AF and SAF layers,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Magnetization switching in AF and SAF layers, Magnetic domains and
domain walls, single domain nano-particles; Pure spin and chage
Pre-requisite(s): PYL115 currents, spin-Hall effect and inverse spin-Hall effect, spin Seebeck
Modes in planar optical waveguides: TE and TM modes, Modes effect, magneto-caloric effect, generation of spin current by charge
in channel waveguides: Effective index and Perturbation method. and thermal current; Current induced magnetization switching, Spin
Directional coupler: coupled mode theory, Integrated Optical torque effect and spin torque oscillators of tunable GHz frequency;
devices: Prism Coupling, optical switching and wavelength filtering High density data storage: MRAM, two stable states, half-select
etc. Step Index and graded index fibers, Attenuation in optical problem, Savtchenko switching and Toggle MRAM; Ultra high density
fibers, LP Guided Modes of a step-index fiber, Single-mode fibers, devices: Current & STT driven DW motion, Race track memory, Shift
Gaussian approximation and splice loss. Pulse dispersion, Dispersion resistor; Q-bits and spin logic.
compensation, Basics of Optical Communication Systems, and recent
trends. Fiber fabrication technology and fiber characterization. pYL423 Nanoscale Energy Materials and Devices
Periodic interaction in waveguides: Coupled Mode Theory, Fiber 3 Credits(3-0-0)
Bragg Gratings, Long period Gratings and applications, Optical fiber
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
sensors: basic principles and applications.
Basics of photovoltaics, Quantum confinement and plasmonics in
pYD414 project III photovoltaic devices, Nanorod solar cells, Principle of operation
of hybrid and dye-sensitized solar cells, Nanoscale materials for
4 Credits (0-0-8)
improving thermoelectric figure of merit, Photoelectrochemical cells.
Pre-requisite(s): PYD411
Working out the detailed work plan and implementation of the project. pYV428 Selected Topics in Nanotechnology
The Project can be a continunation of the project undertaken for Pre-requisite(s): PYL201
PYD 411.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
pYL414 Engineering Optics Topics from the emerging areas of Nanotechnology will form the
basics and the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed
3 Credits (3-0-0)
course contents.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL123
pYV429 Special Topics in Nanotechnology
Lens systems and basic concepts in their design; Optical components:
Mirrors, prisms, gratings and filters; Sources, detectors and their 1 Credit (1-0-0)
characteristics; Optical systems: Telescopes, microscopes, projection Topics from the emerging areas of nanotechnology will form the
systems, photographic systems, interferometers and spectrometers; basics and the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed
Concepts in design of optical systems; Applications in industry, course contents.
defense, space and medicine; CCD, compact disc, scanner, laser
printer, photocopy, laser shows, satellite cameras, IR imagers, LCD, pYL431 Relativistic Quantum Mechanics
Spatial Light modulators. 2 Credits (2-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL331
pYV418 Selected Topics in photonics
Revision of Lorentz transformations, relativistic notations, Lorentz
2 Credits (2-0-0)
group. The Klein-Gordon equation, negative and positive energy
Pre-requisite(s): PYL123 solutions. Charged spin-zero particle, Difficulties with K-G theory. The
Topics from the emerging areas of Photonics will form the basics, Dirac equation, Relativistic invariance, Relativistic invariance, spin
and the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed course and energy projection operators. Nonrelativistic limit, Pauli equation,
contents. Solutions and their properties. Dirac sea, Anti-particle, Klein paradox,
Fodly-Wouthuysen representation. Hydrogen atom, Dirac electron in
pYV419 Special Topics in photonics an electromagnetic field, Charge conjugation.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
pYL432 Quantum Electrodynamics
Pre-requisite(s): PYL123
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Topics from the emerging areas of Photonics will form the basics, and
Pre-requisite(s): PYL331
the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed course contents.
Lagrangian formulation of classical field theory, Field equations,
pYL421 Functional Nanostructures symmetries, Noether’s theorem and conservation laws. Energy-
3 Credits (3-0-0) momentum tensor. Classical field equations: Neutral and charged
scalar fields, Electromagnetic field, Dirac field, Momentum
Pre-requisite(s): PYL125
representation, Second quantization of the free fields, Interacting
Basics of low dimensional structures, QD, QW, nanostructures for fields, interaction picture, Dyson-series,Feynman diagrams and
optical and electronic applications, QD lasers, detectors, SET, Carbon Feynman rules for quantum electrodynamics. Wick’s theorem.
based nanostructures, CNT, CNT optical, electrical, mechanical, Cross-section and S-matrix, Moeller and Bhabha scattering, Compton
chemical properties, sensors, drug delivery, photonic crystals, GMR, scattering, photoelectric effect etc. Divergence, Renormalization
nanostructured magnetism, hydrogen storage, nanoclays, colloids, technique, Mass and charge renormalization.
nanomachines, organic and biological nanostructures.
pYL433 Introduction to Gauge Field Theories
pYL422 Spintronics 2 Credits (2-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL205 & PYL122
Pre-requisite(s): PYL122 Maxwell’s equations and Gauge invariance,Quantum mechanics of
Spintronics, its need and future vision; Basics of magnetic materials, a charged particle as a gauge theory,Vector potential as phase,
spin orbit interaction, spin polarized current and their injection, Aharonov-Bohm Effect,Superconductivity and Magnetic flux
accumulation and detection, Magnetoresistance and concepts of quantization in superconductors, Introduction to continuous symmetry
spin detection and magnetic memory; Spin valves & GMR, CIP and groups, U(1) and SU(2) symmetry groups,Classical field theories,
CPP transport, Semiclassical transport models; Basics of spin valve Local gauge invariance and the gauge fields,Yang-Mills gauge
and magnetic tunnel junctions, Tunnel magneto resistance, Quantum theories, Spontaneous symmetry breaking, Goldstone bosons, Higgs
mechanical model of coherent tunneling and Giant TMR; Magnetic machanism, Weinberg-Salam Model.
299

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
pYL434 particle Accelerators analysis by hybrid and r-parameters, operational amplifiers and their
2 Credits (2-0-0) applications, timer circuit, dc power supplies, filters and digital circuits,
counters, registers, ADC, DAC and microprocessor.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL205 & PYL122
Electrostatic and electromagnetic accelerators: Van de Graff, Tandem pYL558 Statistical Mechanics
acceleration, Linear accelerators, Synchrocyclotron, Storage ring, Free 4 Credits (3-1-0)
electron laser, High energy colliders.
Introduction to statistical methods. Some basic notions of random
walks, Poisson distribution, Gaussian distribution. Statistical basis for
pYL435 Advanced Computational physics
thermodynamics: macrostates, microstates, Gibb’s paradox. Gibb’s
3 Credits (2-1-0) ensemble theory: phase space perspective, Liouville’s theorem,
Pre-requisite(s): PYL204, PYL202 microcanonical, canonical and grand canonical ensembles, partition
function, calculations of physical properties of classical systems
Introduction to computer simulation, Model systems and interaction
using ensemble approach, thermodynamic relations. Applications
potential, Relation of Physics and computer simulations, Basic
of ensemble theory, quantum statistical mechanics: density matrix
Monte Carlo simulation in equilibrium and non-equilibrium systems,
approach, statistical mechanics of Bosons and Fermions, Bose-Einstein
Introduction to Molecular dynamics, Molecular Dynamics in equilibrium
condensation, Pauli paramagnetism, Landau diamagnetism, quantum
and non-equilibrium systems. Analysis of the results.
statistics of harmonic oscillators, non-ideal gases, virial expansion,
pYV438 Selected Topics in Theoretical physics brief introduction to phase transitions, critical phenomena, transfer
matrix approach, application to 1-D Ising model.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL122 pYL560 Applied Optics
Topics from the emerging areas of Theoretical Physics will form the basics, 4 Credits (3-1-0)
and the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed course contents. Electromagnetic waves in a medium: review of Maxwell’s equations
and propagation of electromagnetic waves, various states of
pYV439 Special Topics in Theoretical physics
polarization and their analysis. Anisotropic media, plane waves
1 Credit (1-0-0) in anisotropic media, uniaxial crystals, some polarization devices.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL122 Diffraction: scalar waves, the diffraction integral, Fresnel and
Fraunhofer diffraction, diffraction of a Gaussian beam, diffraction
Topics from the emerging areas of Theoretical Physics will form the
grating. Fourier optics and holography: spatial frequency and
basics, and the faculty offering the course will provide the detailed
transmittance function, Fourier transform by diffraction and by lens,
course contents.
spatial-frequency filtering, phase-contrast microscope. Holography:
pYL551 Classical Mechanics on-axis and off-axis hologram recording and reconstruction, types
of hologram and some applications. Coherence and Interferometry:
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Spatial and temporal coherence, fringe visibility, Michelson stellar
Constraints, generalized coordinates, action principle, symmetries and interferometer, optical beats, multiple beam interference, Fourier
conservation laws, Hamilton’s equations, Poisson brackets, canonical transform spectroscopy. Guided wave optics: Modes of a planar
transformations, central potentials, small oscillations, normal modes, waveguide, optical fibers: step-index and graded index fibers,
rigid body dynamics. waveguide theory and quantum mechanics, applications of optical
fibers in communication and sensing.
pYL552 Electrodynamics
4 Credits (3-1-0) pYD561 project-I
Electrostatics, conductors, dielectrics, magnetostatics, boundary value 3 Credits (0-0-6)
problems, time dependent fields, waves in a medium, relativistic
formulation of Maxwell’s equations, radiation from accelerating pYp561 Laboratory-I
charges, scattering of electromagnetic waves.
4 Credits (0-0-8)
pYL553 Mathematical physics
pYD562 project-II
4 Credits (3-1-0)
6 Credits (0-0-12)
Linear Algebra, complex analysis, Fourier transform, Sturm-Liouville’s
theorem and orthogonal functions, Ordinary differential equations,
pYp562 Laboratory-II
Green Functions/old methods.
4 Credits (0-0-8)
pYL555 Quantum Mechanics-I
4 Credits (3-1-0) pYL563 Solid State physics
Introduction, quantum mechanical wave function, Born interpretation, 4 Credits (3-1-0)
basic formalism (Dirac bra-ket formalism), state vectors, operators Crystal lattices, Reciprocal lattice, equivalence of Bragg and Laue
and their representation, review of one dimensional examples, one formulations, Ewald Construction, bonding & packing in crystals.
dimensional harmonic oscillator, creation and annihilation operators, Free electron theory: Drude and Sommerfield’s model of conductivity.
Landau problem, symmetries in quantum mechanics, hydrogen atom,
Electrons in a Periodic Potential, Bloch theorem in lattice and reciprocal
entanglement.
space, origin of band gap in a weak periodic potential, Kronig-Penney
model, band structures, metal, insulator, semiconductor, concepts
pYL556 Quantum Mechanics-II
of effective mass, light and heavy holes in a semiconductor, optical
3 Credits (3-0-0)
properties of semiconductors. Wannier functions, Tight binding model
Time independent perturbation theory, time dependent perturbation and calculation of band structure, Fermi Surfaces. Thermal Properties:
theory, cross-section, scattering theory, approximation techniques, classical & quantum theory of harmonic crystal in one, two, & three
identical particles, interaction of atoms with radiation, relativistic dimensions, specific heat at high and low temperatures, normal modes
equations. & phonons, Einstein & Debye models of specific heat. Ferroelectric,
Piezoelectric Magnetism: Diamagnetism, Paramagnetism, Hunds Rule,
pYL557 Electronics
Curie’s Law, Cooling by Diamagnetism, Pauli Paramagnetism, Curie-
4 Credits (3-1-0) Weiss Law Ferromagnetism and Antiferromagnetic ordering, Domains.
Basics of semiconductor devices such as diode, transistor, FET and Superconductivity: Basic Phenomenology, Meissner effect, London
MOSFET; BJT and FET based amplifiers, oscillators, switches, circuit penetration depth, coherence length, Flux quantization.
300

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
pYp563 Advanced Laboratory discontinuity and its effect on junction properties; Junction breakdown
4 Credits (0-0-8) mechanisms; Static characteristics of Bipolar transistor; Frequency
response and switching behavior, Non-ideal effects: base width
modulation, early effect, current crowding and high injection effect;
pYL567 Atomic and Molecular physics
Hetero-junction transistor; SCR, M-S junctions: Basic structure, Energy
3 Credits (3-0-0) band relation, I-V characteristics; Ohmic contacts; MOS capacitors,
Hydrogen and alkali metals, double fine structure of atoms, two JFET and MESFET basic principles, MOSFET: structure and operation,
electron atom, Zeeman and Paschen-Back effect, X-ray spectra, basic characteristics and analysis; linear quadratic model; equivalent
general factors influencing spectral line width (Collision, Doppler circuit; Threshold voltage calculation; Substrate biasing effect; LED,
effect, Heisenberg) and line intensities (transition probability, Laser, Photodiode and solar cells, Tunnel, IMPATT & Gunn diodes and
population of states, Beer- Lambert law), Molecular symmetry, comparison of microwave devices.
irreducible representations, Rotational and vibrational spectra of
diatomic molecules, FTIR and Laser Raman spectroscopy, electronic pYL655 Laser physics
spectra, Franck-Condon principle, bond dissociation energies, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Molecular orbital and models, laser cooling of atom.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL560
pYL569 Nuclear and particle physics Introduction. Physics of interaction between Radiation and Atomic
3 Credits (3-0-0) systems including: Stimulated emission, emission line shapes and
dispersion effects. Gain saturation in laser media and theory of Fabry-
N-N interaction, iso-spin symmetry, nuclear models, beta decay,
Perot laser. Techniques for the control of laser output employing Q-
detectors and particle accelerators, Quark model, Deep inelastic
switching, mode-locking and mode-dumping. Optical cavity design and
scattering, Basics of nuclear astrophysics, Fundamental particles
laser stability criteria. Description of common types of conventional
and their properties.
lasers. Physics of semiconducting optical materials, degenerate
semiconductors and their Homo-junctions and Hetero-junctions. Light
pYL650 Fiber and Integrated Optics
emitting diodes (LED’s) junction lasers. Characteristics of diode laser
3 Credits (3-0-0)
arrays and applications.
Modes in planar optical waveguides: TE and TM modes. Modal analysis
of a parabolic index medium. Modes in channel waveguides: Effective pYL656 Microwaves
index method, Perturbation method and Variational method. Modes in
3 Credits (3-0-0)
multilayered waveguides: Matrix method. Directional coupler: coupled
mode theory, Integrated Optical devices: Prism Coupling, optical Pre-requisite(s): PYL552
switching, modulators and wavelength filters, etc. Step Index and Maswell’s equations, Wave equation, Boundary conditions, Ideal
graded index fibers, Attenuation in optical fibers, LP Guided Modes of transmission line, Terminated line, Wave solutions, TEM, TE, and TM
a step-index fiber, Single-mode fibers, Gaussian approximation and waves, Rectangular and circular wave guides, power and attenuation,
splice losses. Dispersion in optical fibers, Pulse dispersion, Dispersion Smith chart, Impedance matching, Double and triple stub tuners,
management. Fabrication and characterization of optical waveguides. Quarter wave and half wave transforms, Equivalent voltage and
Fiber optic components and devices. Optical fiber sensors; Basic currents, Impedance description, Impedance, admittance and
principles and applications. scattering matrix formulation, Signal flow graph, Attenuators, Phase
shifters, Directional couplers, Junctions, Power dividers, Isolators
pYL651 Advanced Solid State physics and circulators, Resonant circuits, Transmission line resonators,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Rectangular and circular wave guide resonators, Electron beams,
Velocity modulation, Klystron, Magnetron, Traveling wave tubes,
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563
Gunn oscillator, Transistor and FET amplifiers, biasing, stability, power
Semiclassical model of electron dynamics, Electrons in static electric gain, noise, Mixers.
and magnetic fields, DC and AC electrical conductivity in metals,
Sources of electron scattering, Boltzmann equation, Temperature
pYL657 plasma physics
dependence of electronic conductivity, Dielectric properties of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
insulators, Pizoelectric, Ferroelectric, Pyroelectric, Optical properties
of solids, Electrons in magnetic fields, Landau Levels, Cylotron Pre-requisite(s): PYL552
resonance, Density of states in magnetic field, De-Haas Van Alfen Introduction to plasma, Debye shielding, Single particle motion
effect, Quantum Hall effect, Models for ferromagnetism, Magnetic in E and B fields, Mirror confinement, Plasma oscillations, Waves
phase transition, Properties of Superconductors, Ginzburg- in unmagnetized plasmas, Solitons, Two stream instability,
Landau theory, Josephson effect, Squids Mircoscopic Theory of Rayleigh Taylor instability, Vlasov equation and Landau damping,
superconductivity: Cooper pairs, BCS theory. Waves in magnetized plasmas (fluid theory), Plasma production
& characterization, Plasma processing of materials, Laser driven
pYL652 Magnetism and Spintronics
fusion, Cerenkov free electron laser, Applications to astrophysics
3 Credits (3-0-0) and astronomy.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563
pYD658 Mini project
Magnetism of metals, Spontaneous spin split bands, Magnetic
anisotropy, Competing interactions, One and two-dimensional 3 Credits (0-0-6)
magnets, Spin dependent transport in magnetic metals - Anisotropic
magnetoresistance, Giant magnetoresistance, Spin dependent pYL658 Advanced plasma physics
tunneling, Tunneling magnetoresistance, Spin-Orbit interaction 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and Hall effects –Spin Hall Effect and Inverse Spin Hall Effect;
Pre-requisite(s): PYL657
Spin injection phenomena - Spin Transfer Torque, Spin injection
magnetization reversal; High frequency phenomena. Nonlinearity and dispersion, solitary waves and solitons, Korteweg-
deVries (kdv) equation, Electromagnetic (EM) radiation from free
pYL653 Semiconductor Electronics charges, Absorption of em waves in plasmas, Radiation by coulomb
collisions, Plasma based Terahertz radiation generation, Hall thrusters,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Rayleigh-Taylor instability, Resistive instability, Electron transport,
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563 or equivalent Waveguide modes in the presence of plasma, Ponderomotive force,
Semiconductors junction review; charge storage and transient wakefield, Particle acceleration, Dusty plasma, Current flow in dust
behavior, equivalent circuit of diode, p-n hetero-structure: band grains, Waves in dusty plasma.
301

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
pYL659 Laser Spectroscopy X-ray fluorescence, determination of transition temperature in
3 Credits (3-0-0) a high temperature superconductor, frequency dependence of
dielectric constants, Lock-in detection technique, Solar cells, Minority
Review of lasers as spectroscopic source, Absorption spectroscopy,
carrier life-time measurements, capacitance-voltage measurements
High sensitive methods, Cavity ring down spectroscopy, Doppler
on semiconductor devices, current-voltage characteristics of
limited spectroscopy: Photo-ionization and Photo-acoustic
varistors, synthesis and electrical characterization of thermistors,
spectroscopy, Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), Laser
disaccommodation factor in ferrites, scanning tunneling microscopy,
induced fluorescence spectroscopy, Nonlinear spectroscopy: Linear
ellipsometry, closed cycle refrigerator, etc.
and nonlinear absorption, saturation spectroscopy, Two-photon and
multi-photon spectroscopy, Laser Raman spectroscopy: Stimulated
pYL703 Electronic properties of Materials
Raman spectroscopy, Coherent anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy
(CARS), Time-resolved spectroscopy: Short pulse generation and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
detection, Life time measurements, Pump-and-probe techniques, Overlap with : PYL102
Time-resolved absorption, Fluorescence and Raman spectroscopy,
Drude and Sommerfeld theory of metals, Periodic Potential, Bloch’s
Applications of laser spectroscopy: Single molecule detection, Trace
theorem, Kronig-Penney Model and Origin of bands, example of real
level detection of explosives and hazardous gases, LIDAR.
band structure, Ferromagnetism, Molecular field theory, Exchange
interactions, Band theory of ferromagnetism, Ferrimagnetism,
pYL701 physical Foundations of Materials Science
Ferrites, Molecular field theory for ferrimagnets, Magnetic Domains,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Type of Domain walls, Structure of domain walls, Soft and Hard
Overlap with : PYL303 magnetic materials, Spin waves, Magnon dispersion relation,
Introduction to nanomagnetism, Dielectric constants of solids and
Imperfections in solids: Points defects, thermodynamics of point
liquids, Claussius-Mossoti relation, dielectric dispersion and losses,
defects. Dislocations: Grain Boundaries: Low and high angle grain
piezo, ferro- and pyroelectricity, Optical constants, atomistic theory of
boundaries. Phase Transformations: Kinetics of phase transformations,
optical properties, quantum mechanical treatment, band transitions,
homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation, kinetic considerations
dispersion, plasma oscillations and excitons.
of solid-state transformations. Diffusion: Diffusion Mechanisms,
Steady and non-steady state diffusion, factors influencing diffusion.
pYL704 Science and Technology of Thin Films
Phase Diagrams: Unary phase diagram, Gibbs Phase Rule, Binary
Isomorphous Systems, Lever Rule, interpretation of phase diagrams, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
determination of phase amounts, Equilibrium and non-equilibrium Overlap with : PYL307
solidification, Binary Eutectic Systems, Equilibrium Diagrams
Kinetic theory of gases and basics of vacuum science and technology,
having intermediate phases or compounds, Eutectoid and Peritectic
Physical Vapor Deposition - Hertz Knudsen equation; mass
Reactions, Congruent Phase transformations, Ternary phase diagrams.
evaporation rate; Knudsen cell, Directional distribution of evaporating
Microstructural and Property changes in Iron-Carbon Alloys. Corrosion
species, Evaporation of elements, compounds, alloys, Raoult’s law,
and degradation of materials: Electrochemical Corrosion of Metals,
Homogenous and Heterogeneous Nucleation, capillarity theory,
Galvanic cells, Corrosion rates, Corrosion reactions, passivation, types
atomistic and kinetic models of nucleation, basic modes of thin film
of corrosion, Mechanisms of oxidation, oxidation rates, corrosion
growth, stages of film growth & cluster coalescence. E-beam beam
control. Materials Selection and Design Considerations.
evaporation, Molecular beam epitaxy and Pulsed Laser Deposition,
Epitaxy–homo, hetero and coherent epilayers, lattice misfit and
pYp701 Solid State Materials Laboratory-I
imperfections, epitaxy of compound semiconductors, scope of devices
3 Credits (0-0-6) and applications, Glow Discharge and Plasma, Sputtering–mechanisms
This laboratory course is designed to make the students familiar and yield, dc and rf sputtering, Bias sputtering, magnetically enhanced
with fundamental experiments related with materials synthesis and sputtering systems, reactive sputtering, Hybrid and Modified PVD- Ion
their primary characterization. Experiments are based on materials plating, reactive evaporation, ion beam assisted deposition, Chemical
synthesis by solid-state reaction route, Spray-pyrolysis, spin and dip Vapor Deposition - reaction chemistry and thermodynamics of CVD;
coating, thermal evaporation and sputtering, Dry and Wet Oxidation Thermal CVD, Laser & plasma enhanced CVD, Atomic layer deposition,
of Silicon, Understanding of binary eutectic phase diagrams, phase Electrodeposition, Spray pyrolysis.
transitions, etc. and study of the optical, electrical, semiconducting
and dielectric properties of the synthesized materials. Simulation pYL705 Nanostructured Materials
experiments to understand the properties of solid state materials
3 Credits (3-0-0)
(e.g. ion-matter interaction, properties of low dimensional materials
Introduction and importance of nanostructured materials. Differences
and band structure estimation) are also included.
in the properties of bulk, nanoparticles, quantum dots, clusters,
pYL702 physics of Semiconductor Devices superlattices and nanostructured layers. Quantum confinement,
surface enhanced properties, effective mass and tight binding
3 Credits (3-0-0)
approximations. Properties of 0D, 1D, 2D and superlattice structures.
Charge carriers in semiconductors: Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, Plasmonic and optical properties of metal nanoparticles, Properties
position of Fermi energy level. Carrier transport phenomenon: Carrier of magnetic nanoparticles, Structure and physical properties of
drift and diffusion, Hall effect. Carrier generation and recombination. nanomaterials. Chemical and physical methods for low dimensional
PN junction: Energy band diagram, electrostatics of pn junction, growth with size control and size selection. Synthesis methods
PN junction current, ideal current-voltage relationship, junction and growth mechanism for nanorods and nanowires. Growth and
breakdown mechanisms, heterojunctions. Metal-semiconductor properties of graphene and other monolayer materials. Application
contacts: Schottky barrier diodes, current transport in Schottky of semiconductor, metal and magnetic nanoparticles. Application
diodes, I-V characteristics, Ohmic contacts. MOS structure: Ideal of nanostructures in catalytics, solar cell, resistive memory,
MOS structure, energy band diagrams under accumulation, depletion thermoelectric, photoelectrochemical and sensor devices.
and inversion conditions, C-V characteristics, various oxide charges
in Si/SiO MOS and their effect on C-V graph, MOSFET, basics about
2 pYL707 Characterization Techniques for Materials
the operation of a MOSFET, I-V relationships of a MOSFET, non ideal
3 Credits (3-0-0)
effects. Optical devices: Basics of Solar cells and photodetectors.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563 (for MSc), PYL125 (for UG)
pYp702 Solid State Materials Laboratory-II
Introduction to structure property correlation in materials, basic
3 Credits (0-0-6) crystallography basic revision in 2-3 classes, k-space, X-ray diffraction,
In this course, the emphasis is given on some advanced experiments Reitveld refinement method and its fundamentals, Ewald sphere,
related with materials characterization, such as X-ray diffraction, Transmission electron microscopy in patterns, Microstructural
302

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
investigations using Scanning electron microscope and Transmission electronic structure, surface states, plasmons, chemical potential/work
electron microscopes, Kinetics of phase transformations in function, experimental methods for surface structure: photoemission
solids - Thermal analysis using differential thermal analysis spectroscopy (PES), inverse photoemission spectroscopy (IPES), low
and Differential scanning calorimetry, other techniques like energy electron diffraction (LEED), Reflection high energy electron
Thermogravimetric analysis, Dynamic mechanical thermal diffraction (RHEED), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), Secondary
analysis, Thin film DSC, Modulateed DSC, Raman and Micro ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM),
Raman spectroscopy, Photoluminescence spectroscopy, Material Grazing incidence XRD, x-ray reflectivity (XRR), scanning electron
compositional analysis like Energy dispersive x-ray(EDX) and Electron microscope (SEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), etc.
probe micro analysis (EPMA).
pYL726 Semiconductor Device Technology
pYL711 Introduction to Nonlinear Dynamics 3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-1-0) Silicon wafer fabrication and oxidation techniques, Growth kinetics and
oxide measurement techniques, defects in silicon and silicon dioxide,
Pre-requisite(s): PYL127 & PYL121 OR PYL551 & PYL553
interface defects, polysilicon, silicon nitride and silicide formation,
Overlaps with: APL340, ESL300, AML836 Lithography and etching techniques, diffusion and ion implantation,
Introduction, phase space, stability analysis, bifurcations, iterative modeling and measurement of dopant profile, Thick and thin film
maps. Dissipative Systems; noninvertible maps; period-doubling and device technology, Processes involved in ink preparation, screen
universality, intermittency. printing, laser trimming, mounting, mask making and packaging,
Thin film deposition, metallization, etc.
Hamiltonian Systems; Integrability, Liouville's theorem, action-angle
variables, perturbation techniques, KAM theorem, area-preserving
pYL727 Energy Materials and Devices
maps.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fractals; Self-similarity; fractal dimensions and multifractals.
Importance of energy materials and devices in present technology.
Chaos in plasmas, Generalised hydrodynamic model for strongly
PV materials and devices: Definition and basic physical quantities;
coupled plasma medium, connections with visco-elastic and soft
Energy band diagram and operation of Schottky, homojunction and
matter.
heterojunction solar cells. Amorphous silicon and thin film based solar
Soft and Active matter: Nonlinear Rheology, Rhea-chaos, Oscillatory cell devices. Physics of tandem solar cell devices. New generation up
Chemical Reactions) Wrinkling, Folding. conversion and down conversion devices. Materials for Si based solar
Quantum chaos: Regular versus irregular states. Path Integrals. cell, thin film solar cells, role of nanomaterials, dye sensitized solar
Random Matrix theory. Streamline and turbulent flows and transport cells. Introduction to PV panels, domestic and industrial applications.
for hydrodynamic and Magnetofluids, Kolmogorov's 5/3 law. Materials and device concept for thermoelectric devices, Methods
for improving the thermoelectric properties, application for heating
Synchrony and phase transitions - Kuramoto model. Chaotic
and cooling applications. Operation of photoelectrochemical cell for
synchronization; the synchronization manifold.
hydrogen production, Energy band and materials requirements.
pYL723 Vacuum Science and Cryogenics
pYL728 Quantum Heterostructures
3 Credits (3-0-0)
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Overlap with : PYL301 Semiconductor heterostructures, Quantum confined systems,
Behavior of Gases; Gas Transport Phenomenon, Viscous, molecular Electron transport in quantum structures, 2DEG, Excitons in quantum
and transition flow regimes, Measurement of Pressure, Residual structures, Quantum confined Stark effect, Integer Quantum Hall
Gas Analyses; Production of Vacuum - Mechanical pumps, Diffusion effect, quantum well and quantum cascade lasers, quantum well
pump, Getter and Ion pumps, Cryopumps, Materials in Vacuum; infrared photodetectors (QWIPD), resonant tunneling devices (RTD),
High Vacuum and Ultra High Vacuum Systems; Leak Detection. high electron mobility transistors (HEMT), quantum interference
Cryogenic Fluids - Helium 3, Helium 4, Superfluidity, Liquefaction of transistors (QIT) and hot electron transistors (HET).
Helium, Experimental Methods at Low Temperature: Closed Cycle
Refrigerators, Cryostat systems based on He4 and He3, He3-He4 pYL729 Nanoprobe Techniques
dilution refrigerator, Pomeranchuk Cooling, Magnetic Refrigerators, 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Thermoelectric coolers; Cryostat Design: Cryogenic level sensors,
Historical perspectives for invention of STM, Optical & Electron
Handling of cryogenic liquids, Cryogenic thermometry.
microscopy, Atom-scale tunnelling, Imaging atomic states, STM
Instrumentation, Imaging modes, Constant current, Constant
pYL724 Advances in Spintronics height, Feedback circuitry, surface topography, local density of the
3 Credits (3-0-0) states, Single molecule vibrational spectroscopy, Image processing
and analysis, Atomic Force Microscopy, Capacitance detection
Overlap with : PYL422 and PYL652
system, Optical detection systems, Imaging modes, Representative
Spin dependent transport in magnetic metals - Anisotropic applications in biological sciences, Force Spectroscopy, Interpreting
Magnetoresistance, Giant Magnetoresistance, Spin dependent force curve, Adhesion, Nanoindentation, Magnetic Force Microscopy,
tunneling, Tunneling magnetoresistance, Spin-Orbit interaction Scanning Capacitance Microscopy, Thermal Methods at the Nanoscale,
and Hall effects –Spin Hall Effect and Inverse Spin Hall Effect; Spin Dip-pen lithography, Near field Scanning Optical Microscopy, Hard
injection phenomena and applications - Spin Transfer Torque, Spin X-ray nanoprobe.
injection magnetization reversal; High frequency phenomena; Spin
Transfer Torque applications, Dilute magnetic semiconductors,
pYL730 plasma Theory and Simulations
Spintronic properties of ferromagnetic semiconductors, Materials for
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Spin Electronics, Spintronic devices and their applications.
Pre-requisite(s): For M.Sc. (Physics): PYL552, For B.Tech. (EP):
pYL725 Surface physics and Analysis PYL205, For M. Tech. (Physics) and PhD (Physics): NIL, For
3 Credits (3-0-0) OE: UG/M.Sc. - PYL205/PYL552, PhD - NIL
Surface structure, stability and reactivity, surface crystallography, Basic concepts (notion of collective plasma behaviour, Debye shielding
surface stress, reconstructions and relaxation, surface sensitivity, etc.), charged particle drifts and numerical techniques to follow
clean surface preparation, physisorption, chemisorption, Langmuir, particle trajectories in crossed electric and magnetic fields, fluid and
kinematics and dynamics of surface processes, properties of interfaces, kinetic model descriptions for plasmas, plasma as a dielectric, linear
adhesion and segregation, surface diffusion, chemical shift in normal modes (concept of electrostatic and electromagnetic, un-
303

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
magnetized and magnetised modes) and fundamental instabilities pYL744 High Energy physics
(Rayleigh Taylor, Kelvin Helmholtz and beam driven), introduction to 3 Credits (3-0-0)
fluid and particle simulation techniques for one dimensional problems,
Overlaps with : PYL433
recovering dispersion relation of normal modes (electron plasma,
ion acoustic etc.) and growth rate for two stream instability through Fundamental interactions; QED; QCD; Marshak-Sudarshan theory
simulations, illustration of nonlinear effects through simulations, of weak interactions; Parity violation; Higgs mechanism; Glashow-
transport properties of plasmas (e.g. diffusion and resistivity etc.) Salam-Weinberg model; The standard model of particle physics;
and their relevance in confinement. Open problems.
pYL745 Advanced Statistical Mechanics
pYL739 Computational Techniques for Solid State
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Materials
Pre-requisite(s): PYL558/PYL202/equivalent
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of basic thermodynamics, Thermodynamic potentials, Equation
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563/PYL114 or equivalent of state. Theory of ensembles, Density matrix. Thermodynamics of
Numerical solution of equations of motion, NVT molecular dynamics phase transitions, Concept of thermodynamic stability, Metastability
(MD), Application of MD for continuous and discontinuous potentials, and instability, Vander Waal equation of state, Phase coexistence:
Probability, Markov chains and master equations, Simple sampling by and Gibbs phase rule. Lattice models to describe phase transition
Monte Carlo (MC) methods, MC simulations for non-equilibrium and e.g. Ising model, Heisenberg model Landau theory of second
irreversible systems, Schrodinger Equation, The Born-Oppenheimer order phase transitions, Scaling hypothesis, Critical exponents
approximation, Wave-funtion based methods, Hartree theory, Hartree- and universality classes, Spatial correlation, Correlation length,
Fock Theory, Density Functional Theory (DFT), Exchange Correlation Importance of fluctuations near critical point. Mean Field theory,
Functional. Transfer matrix method. Concept of renormalization group. Ising
model, Renormalization in one dimension. Related numerical methods,
pYL740 Advanced Condensed Matter Theory Monte-Carlo simulations of spin systems.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): PYL563/PYL125 or equivalent pYL746 Non-equilibrium Statistical Mechanics with
Interdisciplinary Applications
Quantum Fields and their roles in describing collective modes.
Particle creation and annihilation operators: Commutation relations 3 Credits (3-0-0)
for Bosons and Fermions. Second quantization. Equivalence with
Pre-requisite(s): PYL558/PYL202/equivalent
the many body Schroedinger Equation. Identical Conserved particles
Review of equilibrium systems. Systems out of equilibrium, Kinetic
in equilibrium and thermodynamic properties, Simple Examples
theory of gases, Boltzman equation and its application to transport
of Second Quantization, Bosonic and Fermionic systems. Cooper
problems, Master equation and irreversibility. Time correlation
instability and BCS Hamiltonian, Mean field description of BCS
functions, linear response theory, Kubo formula, Onsager relations.
condensate, Quasiparticle excitation and Bogoliubov de-Gennes
Random walks, Brownian motion and diffusion, Langevin equation,
theory. Phase transition and broken symmetry, Order parameter
Fluctuation dissipation theorem, Einstein relation, Fokker-Planck
concept, Landau theory and Landau Ginzburg theory and some
equation. Some selected topics in rachets, Driven diffusive systems.
examples from condensed matter Spin systems and magnetism,
Fluctuation theorems, Jarzynski Equality. Percolation, Polymers,
Heitler London theory and Heisenberg model, Ferromagnets, Spin
Soft condensed matter systems. Biological systems, Applications
waves, Antiferromagnets, Spin-chains.
to Molecular motors, Stochasticity in gene expression. Stochastic
growth models. Monte-Carlo simulations of Random walks and their
pYL741 Field Theory and Quantum Electrodynamics
applications to polymers, Percolation, Diffusion limited aggregation
3 Credits (3-0-0) and other growth models.
Quantization of free fields; Discrete symmetries; Gauge symmetries;
QED; Elementary processes; Higher order effects; Renormalization; pYL747 Non-linear Optics
Novel effects of QED.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
pYL742 General Relativity Pre-requisite(s): PYL560
3 Credits (3-0-0) Wave propagation in anisotropic media. Origin of optical nonlinearity,
Nonlinear optical polarization; Second order and third order processes;
Overlaps with : PYL332
Nonlinear optical wave equation; Second order nonlinear processes;
Brief review of special Relativity, Principle of equivalence: weak,
Second harmonic generation, difference and sum frequency generation,
strong and Einstein, Experimental evidence for equivalence principle
Phase insensitive and phase sensitive optical parametric amplifiers,
of covariance, Curvilinear coordinates, Tensor algebra and tensor
Spontaneous parametric down conversion; Birefringence and quasi
analysis, Parallel transport, Curvature tensor, Ricci and Einstein
phase matching; Optical parametric oscillators. Third order nonlinear
tensors, Einstein equation, The Schwarschild metric, Shift in
processes; Third harmonic generation, Self phase modulation, Cross
perihelion of planets, Bending of light ray, Modern tests with light
phase modulation and four wave mixing; Impact of nonlinear effects
delay, Gravitational lensing, Gravitational waves, and their detection,
in lightwave communication systems; supercontinuum generation;
Freidman-Robertston-Walker metric, the Hubble expansion.
Phase conjugation and applications, Stimulated Raman and
Brillouin scattering; Applications of stimulated processes. Electro
pYL743 Group Theory and its Applications optic, photorefractive and acousto optic effects and their applications,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Ultrafast and intense field nonlinear optics. Special topics.
Concept of a group, multiplication tables, cyclic and permutation
groups, subgroups, cosets, Isomorphism and Homomorphism, pYL748 Quantum Optics
conjugate elements and classes, normal sub-groups and factor
3 Credits (3-0-0)
group, direct product of groups, Group representations, Unitary
and Irreducible, representations, Schur’s Lemmas, orthonormality Pre-requisite(s): PYL556/PYL122
theorems, Character tables, Basis functions for irreducible HBT effect, Quantization of the EM field, Quantum states of light,
representations. Continuous groups, Lie groups, The rotation group, correlation functions, Detection of quantum light and techniques,
Special orthogonal and unitary groups, crystallographic point groups coincidence-counting, Phase-sensitive detection, Quantum treatment
and their representations. Applications in quantum mechanics and of linear optics, Quantum light by non-linear optical processes,
solid state physics. SPDC, Signatures of quantum behaviour, Landmark experiments in
304

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
quantum optics, Applications: Laser cooling and BEC, Ion trapping, Position and shape factors; Meridional ray tracing; Paraxial rays
CPT, EIT, Slow light, Introduction to quantum communication: and first order optics; Primary chromatic aberration: Achromat
Quantum teleportation, Entanglement swapping, Quantum repeaters, doublet, Triplet and dialyte, tolerances, Chromatic aberration at
Quantum cryptography. finite aperture; Spherical aberration: Surface contribution formulas;
Spherically corrected achromat; Oblique pencils : Tracings of oblique
pYL749 Quantum Information and Computation meridional and skew rays; Coma and Abbe Sine Condition; Image
3 Credits (3-0-0) evaluation: Geometric OTF, Strehl ratio, Spot diagram; definition of
Merit function; Cooks Triplet and its derivatives; Double Gauss lens,
Basic classical and Quantum mechanics; Basic information theory;
Introduction to Zoom lenses and Aspherics, Examples of modern
Bits, Qubits and ebits; Non-locality and entanglement; Quantum
optical system, GRIN optics.
gates and circuits; Teleportation, Superdense coding, Quantum
oracles; Quantum algorothms; Quantum encryption; Quantum error
correction; Quantum computers. pYL755 Basic optics and optical instrumentation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
pYL750 Topology in Condensed Matter physics
Ray optics, wave optics and E.M. wave optics, Reflection and
3 Credits (3-0-0) refraction of plane waves and by spherical surfaces; Lens aberrations;
Polarization and Polarizing components; Diffraction: Diffraction by
Pre-requisite(s): Solid State Physics and Quantum Mechanics.
single and multiple slits and circular aperture, Gaussian beams,
PYL125 or PYL563 or equivalent and PYL122 or PYL555 or equivalent
Interference: Two beam and multiple beam interference.
Berry Phase, Hall Conductance and Chern number, Time Reversal
Inteferometers: Shearing and Scanning interferometers, Interferometric
Symmetry, Kramers Theorem, Concept of Edge modes, The bulk-
instrumentation for testing, Polarization interferometers; Spectroscopic
edge correspondence, Graphene Edge Modes, Dirac Fermions,
instrumentation, Fourier transform spectroscopy; Imaging and super
Stability of Dirac Points with Inversion and Time Reversal, Haldane's
resolution imaging, near-field imaging techniques; Adaptive optics;
Graphene Model, Twisted Angle Graphene, Topological Insulators,
Wavefront sensing and correction,reconstruction, Opto-medical
Role of Spin-orbit coupling, The Kane and Mele Model, Z2 Invariants,
instruments; Optical coherence tomography, Infrared instrumentation;
Experimental Consequences of the Z2 Topological Invariant, 3D and
I.R. telescopes, Focal plane arrays; Light field camera, Space optics;
2D topological Insulators. Quantum Anomalous Hall Effect and Chern
Satellite cameras, High-resolution radiometers, Space telescopes,
Insulators, Topological Magnetoelectric Effect, Spintronics using
Space based sensors.
Topology, Weyl Semimetals and Topological Fermi Arc, Topological
Superconductors in One and Two Dimensions, Kitaev Model, Lattice
p-Wave Wire and Majorana Fermions, Bound States on Vortices pYL756 Fourier optics and holography
in 2-D Chiral p-wave Superconductors, Concept of detection, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
braiding and fusion of Majorana. Topological quantum computation, Signals and systems, Fourier Transform(FT), Sampling theorem;
Majorana qubits. Quantum Computing with Majorana Kramers Pairs, Diffraction theory; Fresnel-Kirchhoff formulation and angular spectrum
Quantum information processing with Majorana bound states in method, brief discussion of Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, FT
superconducting circuits. Properties of lenses and Image formation by a lens; Frequency
response of a diffraction-limited system under coherent and incoherent
pYL751 Optical sources, photometry and metrology illumination, OTF-effects of aberration and apodization, Comparison
3 Credits (3-0-0) of coherent and incoherent imaging, Super-resolution; Techniques
Eye and vision: Visual system, Sensitivity, Acuity; Radiometry for measurement of OTF; Analog optical information processing:
and Photometry: Radiometric quantities and their measurements, Abbe-Porter experiment, phase contrast microscopy and other simple
Photometric quantities, Radiation from a surface; Brightness and applications; Coherent image processing: Vander Lugt filter; Joint-
luminous intensity distribution; Integrating sphere; Illumination from transform correlator; Pattern recognition, Synthetic Aperture Radar.
a line, Surface and volume sources; Colorimetry: Fundamentals, Basics of holography, in-line and off-axis holography; transmission
Trichromatic specifications, Colorimeters, CIE system; Conventional and reflection holograms, Amplitude and phase holograms, Recording
light sources: Point and extended sources; Incandescent, fluorescent, materials. Thick and thin holograms.
discharge lamps; LEDs; Lighting fundamentals, Optical detectors;
Detector characteristics, Noise considerations, Single & multi-element pYL757 Statistical and Quantum optics
detectors, CCDs.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Optical metrology: Surface inspection, Optical gauging and profiling,
Overlaps with: PYL748
Techniques for non-destructive testing, Moire self imaging and Speckle
metrology, Sensing elements. Probability theory, Generating function, Characteristic function;
Analytic signal representation, Correlation and spectral properties,
pYL752 Laser systems and applications Temporal, spatial and partial coherence, Law of interference,
spectral interference, Coherent mode representation, Propagation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of coherence; Higher order correlations; Photodetection probability,
Review of Laser theory, properties of laser radiation, and laser safety;
Mandel’s photon counting formula; Intensity interferometry, Speckle
CW lasers systems: Ruby-, Nd: YAG- and Nd: Glass lasers, DPSS
statistics and applications, Field quantization, Number states,
lasers, Fiber lasers, Gas lasers, Pulsed lasers: ns, ps, and fs lasers,
Coherent states, Glauber-Sudarshan representation, Tests for non-
Excimer-, dye-, X-ray- and Free-electron lasers; Semiconductor lasers:
classicality, Quantum correlations, Two photon coherence function
DH, QW, QCL, VCSEL, DFB- and DBR lasers; Application of lasers
and coincidence count rate, Quantum treatment of beamsplitter and
in data storage,communication and information technology; Laser
simple interferometers.
applications in optical metrology; Surface profile and dimensional
measurements; Laser Applications in material processing and
pYL758 Advanced Quantum optics and applications
manufacturing; 3D-printing, Marking, Drilling, Cutting, Welding,
Hardening and Manufacturing; Laser Doppler velocimetry, LIDAR, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
laser spectroscopy, LIF, LIBS, Bio-medical applications of lasers, Laser Pre-requisite(s): PYL757
tweezers and applications, Laser applications in defence.
Quantization of the EM field, Quantum states of light, Correlation
functions, Photodetection techniques, Generation of quantum light,
pYL753 Optical systems design
Detection of quantum light, coincidence-counting, Phase-sensitive
3 Credits (3-0-0) detection, Quantum treatment of linear optics, Quantum light by non-
Gaussian theory of optical system; Aberrations: Transverse ray and linear optical processes, Signatures of quantum behaviour, Squeezed
wave aberrations; Chromatic aberration; Third order aberrations; states and applications, Landmark experiments in quantum optics,
305

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
Light-matter interaction, Quantum memories, Experimental quantum theory: Optical coherence tomography, stellar interferometry, Laser
communications : Quantum teleportation, Entanglement swapping, speckle and speckle metrology, Fourier transform spectroscopy,
Quantum repeaters. Partial coherence in imaging systems, Propagation through random
inhomogeneous media.
pYL759 Computational optical imaging
3 Credits (3-0-0) pYp762 Advanced optics laboratory
Revision of Fourier optics and basic concepts in optical imaging, 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Mathematical preliminaries on inverse problems in imaging, Experiments related to recording and development of holograms,
Compressive imaging, Multi-view imaging systems, Point-spread Laser Speckles, Fresnel hologram, Reflection and Rainbow hologram,
function engineering, Phase retrieval, Interferometric imaging Polarization, Spatial filtering, Digital holography, Optical security
methods such as digital holography and optical coherence systems, Optical singularity, Nonlinear optical processes, Tomography,
tomography, Imaging through turbulent media, Super-resolution Profilometry, Polarizing microscope, Strain viewer.
through structured illumination, Correlation/Ghost imaging.
pYp763 Computational Optics laboratory
pYL760 Biomedical optics and Bio-photonics 3 Credits (0-0-6)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): PYL756
Introduction to Biophotonics: Photobiology: Light-tissue interactions Ray tracing in optical systems with commercial software, Image
and light induced effects in Biological systems. Optical properties handling in MATLAB or similar environment for optics experiments,
of tissue – absorption, scattering, diffraction, and emission. Simulation of Fresnal and Fraunhofer diffraction, Fourier transforms
Spectroscopy: Fluorescence, Raman and diffuse reflectance and applications in optics, Simulation of spatial filtering, Matched
spectroscopy: Physics and their applications. Basic principles of optical filtering and pattern recognition, Simulation of Joint Transform and
imaging and spectroscopy systems. Principles of standard optical Vander Lugt correlators, Synthesis of computer generated hologram
microscopy/fluorescence microscopy/ endoscopy and instrumentation. and optical reconstruction, Simulation of recording and reconstruction
Confocal microscopy: Principles, instrumentation and applications. of digital holograms, Interferogram analysis using Fourier and Phase
Two-photon and multi-photon microscopy. Physics of optical tweezers shifting methods, Stokes parameters of optical beams and plotting of
and it’s applications in biology. Bio-medical applications of lasers: polarization ellipse, Simulation of Multi-beam interference for Photonic
Laser scissors, Photo-dynamic therapy. Optical coherence tomography Crystal Designs, Design Project.
(OCT): Physics, Imaging concepts and applications. Photo-acoustic
tomography (PAT): Physics, Imaging concepts and applications. pYp764 Advanced Optical Workshop
Quantitative phase microscopy; Principles and imaging concepts,
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Imaging beyond diffraction limit; SIM, STED, NSOM, Image processing
and image recovery methods. Development of metal optics, Infrared imaging, Fabrication of Total
Internal Reflection Prisms, Measurement of thin coating, Fabrication
pYL761 Liquid Crystals of Shearing plate, Shearing interferometry, Talbot interferometry,
Moire interferometry.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Nematic, Cholesteric, Smectic and Ferro-electric liquid crystals, pYL770 Ultra-fast optics and applications
Landau-de Gennes and Frank-Oseen free energy, Nematic-isotropic
3 Credits (3-0-0)
phase transition, Landau theory and Maier-Saupe theory, Kerr
effect, Pockel effect, Polarizing Microscopy, Differential Scanning Overlaps with : PYL412
calorimetery, Dielectric Spectroscopy, Bent core liquid crystals, Twist Generating and measuring Ultrashort Optical Pulses, Ultra-Broadband
bent liquid crystals, Display applications. Optical Parametric Amplifiers, Advances in Solid-State Ultrafast Laser
Oscillators, Ultrafast Quantum Control in Atoms and Molecules,
pYp761 Optical fabrication and metrology laboratory Femtosecond Optical Frequency Combs, Ultrafast Material Science
3 Credits (0-0-6) Probed using Coherent X-Ray Pulses from High-Harmonic Generation,
Trepanning, Grinding, Curve generation, Smoothing and polishing, Ultrafast Nonlinear Fibre Optics and Supercontinuum Generation,
Centering and Edging, Optical coating, Autocollimator, Newton Nonlinear Wavelength Conversion and Pulse Propagation in Optical
interferometer, Twyman-Green interferometer, Shack Hartmann Fibres, Applications of Ultra-Intense, Short Laser Pulses, Utilising
Sensor and Moire, Talbot interferometry for measurement of optical Ultrafast Lasers for Multiphoton Biomedical Imaging, Femtosecond
performance parameters of the optical elements, Spherometers, Abbe Laser Micromachining, Technology and Applications of THz waves,
refractometer, White light, Fabry-Perot interferometers. Ultrafast Nonlinear Microscopy, Attosecond Generation.
pYL762 Statistical Optics and Optical Coherence Theory pYL771 Green photonics
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of probability and random variables. Probability and Need for green photonics, Overview of solid-state lighting
Statistics in Optics. Stochastic processes to represent optical fields. technologies and their advantages. Inorganic and Organic LEDs:
Ergodicity and stationarity, Auto-correlation, cross-correlation, and Fundamentals, Device Physics, Diode structures and operating
Wiener-Khinchin theorem, Gaussian and Poisson random processes. principles. Materials for LEDs, OLEDs and PLEDs: Phosphor materials
First-order properties of optical fields: Radiation from sources of and their characterisation. LEDs and OLED fabrication, encapsulation
any state of coherence. Monochromatic, polychromatic and broad and Packaging techniques. Electro-optical properties of LEDs and
light sources. Polarized, partially polarized and unpolarized thermal OLEDs; Electric drive circuits, internal, external and power efficiency,
light and pseudo-thermal light. Second-order coherence theory in Spectral distribution, and encapsulants. Design and development of
space-time domain: Temporal coherence and complex degree of light out-coupling techniques. Photometry and colorimetry of LEDs
self coherence. Spatial coherence and complex degree of mutual and OLEDs. Free-form optics and design of LEDs and OLEDs based
coherence, Cross-spectral density, propagation of mutual coherence, illumination systems: General lighting, Traffic lights, Automotive,
The Van Cittert-Zernike theorem and it’s application to stellar Street & flood lighting, and Backlights for displays.
interferometry. Higher-order coherence theory: Hanbury-Brown Sunlight Harvesting Technologies, Non-imaging Solar Concentrators
and Twiss experiment, Intensity-intensity correlation and Ghost and illuminators: Parabolic and Fresnel lens, Diffractive, Micro-optics
imaging. Second order coherence theory in space-frequency domain: and Free-form optics for lighting and illumination engineering of day light
Concept of cross-spectral density, spectral degree of coherence, saving, light guiding devices and diffuse lighting materials and devices.
Wiener-Khintchin theorem, Electromagnetic coherence, Degree of Solar photovoltaics: Inorganic, Organic and Polymeric solar cells:
polarization and applications. Applications of second-order coherence Principles, Technology and Applications. Role of solar concentrators.
306

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Physics
pYL772 plasmonic sensors Experiments on characterisation of optical fibers, sources, detectors
3 Credits (3-0-0) and modulators, in the Physics Department and experiments
on electronics and communication in the Electrical Engineering
Optical fiber, optical fiber sensors, characteristics and components of
Department.
optical fiber sensors, Spectroscopic techniques, Modulation schemes;
Physics of plasmons, Surface plasmons at semi-infinite metal-dielectric
interface, Excitation of Surface plasmons, surface plasmon resonance pYL792 Optical Electronics
(SPR) condition, Interrogation techniques; Theory of SPR based 3 Credits (3-0-0)
optical fiber sensors, N-layer model, excitation by meridional rays: Light propagation through anisotropic media; Electro optic effect and
on axis excitation, performance parameters: sensitivity, detection electro optic modulators and switches; Liquid crystal devices and
accuracy and figure of merit; SPR based sensing applications, spatial light modulators, Acousto optic effect, acousto optic tunable
refractive index and other analytes sensing, multichannel sensing, filter, acousto optic deflector, scanner and spectrum analyser; Basics
multianalyte sensing; Factors affecting performance of the sensor: of nonlinear optical effects; Second harmonic generation, phase
fiber parameters, change of metal, high index dielectric material, matching, quasi phase matching, Sum and difference frequency
probe design, Temperature and ionic fluid. generation, parametric amplification and parametric oscillation; Third
order nonlinear optical effects, Self phase modulation and soliton
PYL780 Diffractive and micro optics formation, Cross phase modulation and four wave mixing; Stimulated
3 Credits (3-0-0) Raman and Brillouin scattering; Nonlinear effects in optical fibers.
Diffractive optics, Micro optics, Design of diffractive optics, Amplitude
and Phase Diffractive Optics, Application of Diffractive optics, JOL793 Selected Topics-I
Fabrication of Diffractive and micro optics, Photo-Lithography, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Interferometric, profilometric and other testing techniques for
Diffractive optics, Plastic optics, Injection Moulding of plastic optics,
Applications of Micro optics in Beam shaping, MOEMS, Optical pYL793 photonic Devices
information technology and Aspheric optics, Freeform optics. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with : PYL312
pYL790 Integrated Optics
Review of Semiconductor Physics for Photonics: The Density of States
3 Credits (3-0-0) ρ(k) and ρ(E); Density of States in a Quantum Well Structure; Carrier
Guided TE and TM Modes of Symmetric and Asymmetric Planar Concentration & Fermi Level; Quasi Fermi Levels. Semiconductor
waveguides: Step-index and graded-index waveguides. Strip and Optoelectronic Materials; Heterostructures, Strained-Layers, Bandgap
channel waveguides, anisotropic waveguides, Marcatili’s Method, Engineering; p-n junctions; Schottky Junctions & Ohmic Contact.
Effective-Index method and Perturbation method of analysis.
Interaction of Photons with Electrons and Holes in a Semiconductor;
Directional couplers, Coupled mode analysis of uniform and reverse
Rates of Emission and Absorption; Amplification by Stimulated
delta-beta couplers. Applications as power splitters, Y-junction, optical
Emission; The Semiconductor Optical Amplifier. Quantum Confined
switch; phase and amplitude modulators, filters, A/D converters,
Stark Effect and Franz-Keldysh Effect. Electro-absorption Modulator:
Y-splitters, Mode splitters, polarization splitters; Mach-Zehnder
Principle of Operation and Device Configuration. Light Emitting Diode:
interferometer based devices, Acoustooptic waveguide devices.
Device Structure and Output Characteristics, Modulation Bandwidth,
Arrayed waveguide devices, Nano-photonic-devices: Metal/dielectric
Materials for LED, and Applications. White light LEDs.
plasmonic waveguides, Long and short range surface Plasmon modes
Laser Diodes: Device Structure and Output Characteristics, Single
supported by thin metal films, Applications in waveguide polarizers
Frequency Lasers; DFB, DBR Lasers, VCSEL, Quantum Well and
and bio-sensing. Fabrication of integrated optical waveguides and
Quantum Cascade Laser, Micro-cavity lasers. Modulation of Laser
devices. Waveguide characterisation, End-fire and prism coupling;
Diodes, Practical Laser Diodes & Handling. Photodetectors:
grating and tapered couplers, Fiber pigtailing, Nonlinear effects in
General Characteristics of Photodetectors, Impulse Response,
integrated optical waveguides.
Photoconductors, PIN, APD, Array Detectors, CCD, Solar Cell. Photonic
Integrated Circuits.
JOp791 Laboratory-I (Fiber Optics and Opt. Comm. Lab)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
JOL794 Selected Topics-II
Experiments on characterisation of optical fibers, sources, detectors
and modulators, in the Physics Department and experiments 3 Credits (3-0-0)
on electronics and communication in the Electrical Engineering
Department. JOS795 Independent Study
3 Credits (0-3-0)
pYL791 Fiber Optics
Detailed study on a contemporary topic in the area of Optoelectronics /
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Optical Communication, as suggested by the Course Coordinator.
Overlaps with : PYL413 and PYL650
Rays and ray paths in optical fibers; Numerical aperture; Step index pYL795 Optics and Lasers
and graded index fibers; Attenuation in optical fibers; Modal analysis of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
symmetric planar waveguides; TE and TM modes, mode cutoff, power
flow: Linearly polarized (LP) modes in step-index optical fibers; Mode Overlaps with : PYL115, PYL311, PYL560 and PYL655
cutoff, single mode operation; Mode field diameter in single mode Review of basic optics: Reflection and refraction of plane waves;
fibers, LP modes of infinitely extended parabolic medium, Intermodal Polarization and polarizing devices; Diffraction: diffraction due to
dispersion in multimode fibers; Optimum profile fibers; Dispersion and single slit and circular aperture, grating, Gaussian beam; Interference:
chirping of pulses in single mode fibers, Dispersion compensation and two beam and multiple beam interference, Fabry-Perot interferometer,
dispersion tailoring; Birefringence in optical fibers, Polarization mode Michelson interferometer; Fourier optics and its applications, spatial
dispersion; Specialty fibers: Birefringent fibers, Photonic crystal fibers; frequency filters.
Erbium doped fiber amplifiers and lasers; Fiber optic components: Interaction of light with matter, light amplification and oscillaton, Laser
fiber Bragg gratings, directional couplers; Fiber fabrication and rate equations, three level and four level systems, Line broadening
characterization techniques; OTDR, connectors and splices. mechanisms, Laser power around threshold, Optical resonators and
resonator stability, Modes of a spherical mirror resonator, mode
JOp792 Laboratory-II (Fiber Optics and Opt. Comm. Lab) selection, Q-switching, mode locking in lasers, properties of laser
3 Credits (0-0-6) radiation, laser systems and some applications of lasers.
307

Physics Courses of Study 2024-2025
JOV796 Selected Topics in photonics holography, Digital holography and its applications: Holgraphic
1 Credit (1-0-0) interferometry, Holographic contouring, NDT of engineering
objects, Optical testing, HOEs, Particle sizing, holographic Particle
Image Velocimetry, Microscopy, Interferoemtry, Imaging through
pYL800 Numerical and Computational Methods in aberrated media, phase amplification by holography, Multifunction
Research elements, diffusers, interconnects, couplers, scanners, Optical data
3 Credits (3-0-0) storage, optical data processing, holographic solar concentrators,
Associative memory.
Solution of polynomial and transcendental equations, ordinary
differential equations with initial conditions, matrix algebra and
simultaneous equations, eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a real pYL879 Selected Topics in Applied Optics
symmetry matrix, least square curve fittings, numerical integration, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
integral equations, ordinary differential equation with boundary
conditions, Monte Carlo methods and random numbers.
pYV881 Selected Topics-I
1 Credit (1-0-0)
JOD801 Major project part-I
6 Credits (0-0-12) pYV882 Selected Topics-II
Analysis/Design/Simulation/Experimental study on topics in the board 1 Credit (1-0-0)
area of Optoelectronics and Optical Communication, offered by the faculty.
pYD883 Minor project
JOD802 Major project part-II
3 Credits (0-0-6)
12 Credits (0-0-24)
Detailed investigations on the study of contemporary topics in pYL891 Fiber Optic Components and Devices
the board area of Optoelectronics and Optical Communication.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Normally this is a follow-up of the study carried out under Part-1
of the Major Project. Pre-requisite(s): PYL413 or PYL650 or PYL791
Review of optical fiber properties: step and graded index fibers,
pYD801 Major project part-I multimode, single mode, birefringent, photonic crystal and holey fiber:
Directional couplers: Analysis, fabrication and characterization: Fused
6 Credits (0-0-12)
and polished fiber couplers application in power dividers, wavelength
Study on topics in the board area of Solid State Materials, offered
division multiplexing, interleavers and loop mirrors: Fiber half-block
by the faculty.
devices and application in polarizers, and wavelength filters. Fiber
grating: Short and Long period gratings, Analysis, fabrication and
pYD802 Major project part-II characterization: application in add-drop multiplexing, gain flattening,
12 Credits (0-0-24) dispersion compensation and wavelength locking and sensing.
Polarization effects in Optical fibers, Fiber polarization components:
Detailed investigations on the study of contemporary topics in the
Fiber optic wave-plates, polarization controllers and associated micro-
board area of Solid State Materials. Normally this is a follow-up of
optic components like isolators and circulators; Optical fiber sensors:
the study carried out under Part-1 of the Major Project.
Intensity, phase, polarization and wavelength-shift based sensors,
applications in various disciplines.
pYD851 Major project part-I
6 Credits (0-0-12)
pYL892 Guided Wave photonic Sensors
Study on topics in the board area of Applied Optics, offered by the
3 Credits (3-0-0)
faculty.
Pre-requisite(s): PYL413 or PYL650 or PYL790 or PYL791
pYD852 Major project part-II Review of propagation characteristics of single and multimode
optical Fibers and Integrated optical Waveguides. Surface plasmon
12 Credits (0-0-24)
modes supported by a single metal/dielectric interface and metal/
Detailed investigations on the study of contemporary topics in the dielectric waveguides. Fiber Optic Sensors: Intensity, phase,
board area of Applied Optics. Normally this is a follow-up of the study polarization and wavelength modulation schemes. Intensity based
carried out under Part-I of the Major Project. sensors: using microbends and tapers in multimode fibers, Mach-
Zehnder interferometer sensors, Fiber Optic gyroscope, Fiber optic
pYS855 Independent Study current sensor, Photonic crystal based sensors. Sensors based
3 Credits (0-3-0) on Bragg and Long period gratings in Fiber and integrated
optical waveguides, Sensors based on modal interference:
Applications in temperature, strain and refractive index sensing.
pYL858 Advanced Holographic techniques
Distributed Sensors based on Raman and Brillouin Scattering.
3 Credits (3-0-0) Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) bio-sensors based on
Basic concepts in holography, Holographic displays and stereograms, Krechman and Otto configurations, coupling with optical fiber
Image holograms, White light, Rainbow holograms, Color holograms, modes, Grating coupled, Localised SPR, Plasmonic nanoparticles,
Volume holograms, Diffraction efficiencies, Fourier Transform interferometry. Signal processing, Noise factors in sensors and
holograms, Pattern recognition, Correlators. Computer generated sensor networking.
308

Department of Textile and Fibre Engineering
TXL130 polymer Chemistry fibre configurations in sliver. Objectives, principles and methods
3 Credits (3-0-0) of roller drafting. Purpose and principle of condensation of fibres.
Causes of mass variation of sliver and control. Automation and recent
The course will deal with chain and step growth polymerization
developments in blowroom, card and draw frames. Fibre opening,
methods, polymer’s macromolecular architecture, molecular weight of
carding and drawing for wool, jute and other fibres. Modification in
polymers, copolymerization, cross-linked polymers, general structure
process parameters for processing blended fibres in blowroom, card
and characteristics of polymers, properties of fiber forming polymers
and drawframe.
and their applications.
TXp221 Yarn Manufacture Laboratory-I
TXL111 Textile Fibres
1 Credit (0-0-2)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130
Classification of fibres. Basic structure of a fibre. General properties
of a fibre such as moisture absorption, tenacity, elongation, initial Experiments related to the lecture course entitled “Yarn Manufacture
modulus, yield point, toughness, elastic recovery. Relationship between I (TXL221)”.
polymer structure and fiber properties. Detailed chemical and physical
TXL222 Yarn Manufacture-II
structure of natural fibres: cotton, wool and silk, their basic properties.
Introduction to important bast and leaf fibres. Basic introduction 3 Credits (3-0-0)
to Fibre spinning. Introduction Manmade and synthetic fibres:
Pre-requisite(s): TXL221/TXP221
Viscose, Acetate, Acrylic, Nylon, polyester. High Performance Fibres.
Fibre fractionation and combing. Preparation of fibre assembly for
Laboratory exercises would include experiments on fibre identification combing. Principle of operations of a rectilinear comber. Combing
through physical appearance, microscopic (optical, SEM), and burning machine elements. Timing diagram theory of fibre fractionation.
behaviour. Chemical identification through solvent treatment and Roving formation: Elements of roving frame, drafting, twisting and
elemental analysis. winding in roving frame, principle and mechanism of builder motion
in roving frame. Yarn formation: Elements of ring frame, drafting,
TXL211 Structure and physical properties of Fibres
twisting and winding in ring frame, design aspects of spindles, rings
3 Credits (3-0-0) and travellers, builder motion in ring frame. Spinning geometry. Twist
and yarn strength. Yarn doubling : Purpose of doubling and plying
Pre-requisite(s): TXL130/TXL111
of yarns, ring doubling, two-for-one and three for one twisting. New
Molecular architecture. Configuration. Conformation. Amorphous and
spinning methods: Principles of yarn formation in rotors, friction,
crystalline phases. Glass transition. Crystallization. Melting. Structures
airjet, and vortex spinning. Yarn structure and property comparison.
in natural and synthetic fibres. Characterization techniques. Fibre
properties. Moisture absorption properties. Mechanical properties. TXp222 Yarn Manufacture Laboratory-II
Fibre friction. Optical properties. Thermal properties.
1 Credit (0-0-2)
TXL212 Manufactured Fibre Technology Pre-requisite(s): TXP221/TXL221
3 Credits (3-0-0) Experiments related to the lecture course entitled “Yarn Manufacture
II (TXL222)”.
Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL111
Polymer rheology in shear as well as extension. Polymer entanglements. TXL231 Fabric Manufacture-I
Flow instabilities in polymer fluids. Principles of solidification. Heat and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
mass transfer. Melt spinning. Force and momentum balance in spinline.
Stress induced crystallization. Experimental observations from melt Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130
spinning of polyamides and polyesters. Solution spinning. Dry and wet Introduction to various fabric forming principles: weaving, knitting,
spinning. Transport phenomena. Kinetic and thermodynamic effects nonwoven and braiding. Stages of woven fabric manufacturing:
in solution spinning. Solution spinning of viscose and acrylic fibres. winding, warping, sizing, drawing and tying in and weaving. Winding:
Dry jet wet spinning. Post spinning processes. Drawing and heat principles, precision and random winding, digicone winding, yarn
setting. Stress-strain-structure relationship. Effect of post spinning tensioning and clearing. Warping: direct and sectional warping. Sizing:
operations on fibre structure and properties. Spin finish applications. size materials, sizing machines, process and quality control, modern
Introduction to electrospinning. trends. Drawing and tying in. Basic fabric designs: plain, matt, rib,
twill and satin, drafting and lifting plans. Primary motions of shuttle
TXp212 Manufactured Fibre Technology Lab looms: cam shedding, cam designs, dobby and jacquard systems,
1 Credit (0-0-2) picking systems, loom timing, beat up, sley eccentricity. Secondary
and auxiliary motions: take up, let off, warp and weft stop and warp
Pre-requisite(s): TXL212/TXL211
protecting motions.
The laboratory experiments are planned to provide knowledge on fibre
formation of selected synthetic polymers and the characterization of TXp231 Fabric Manufacture Laboratory-I
fibres/tapes produced. Melt-spinning, extrusion, wet spinning and
1 Credit (0-0-2)
dry-jet wet spinning techniques is used to produce fibres or tapes.
The evaluation of structure through thermo-mechanical properties, Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130
polymer solution rheology and microscopic analysis of materials is Experiments related to the theoretical paper TXL231.
carried out using established methods.
TXL232 Fabric Manufacture-II
TXL221 Yarn Manufacture-I
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL231/TXP231
Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130 Shuttleless looms: Principles of weft insertion in projectile, rapier,
Impurities in natural fibres. Separation of trash and lint. Pre-baling air-jet and water-jet looms, comparison of various weft insertion
operations for staple fibres. Purpose of opening, cleaning, mixing and systems, principles of two phase, multiphase, circular and narrow
blending of fibres. Blow room machinery and operating elements. fabric weaving. Leno weaving, Triaxial weaving, different types of
Principles of fibre opening and cleaning in blow room. Transportation selvages, common fabric defects, Knitting: Basic weft and warp knitted
of fibre mass. Influence of process parameters on opening and constructions, cams and needles, different weft and warp knitted
cleaning. Analysis of opening and cleaning processes. Principles and structures and their properties, weft and warp knitting machines.
methods of fibre mixing and blending. Principles of carding. Machine Nonwovens: Definitions and classifications, production technology,
elements and operations in card. Sliver formation, Sliver packaging, selection criteria and important properties of fibres used, different
309

Textile and Fibre Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
types of web information and bonding techniques, production and TXS301 Independent Study
properties of needle punched, adhesive bonded, thermally bonded, 3 Credits (0-3-0)
hydroentangled, spun bonded and meltblown fabrics. Braided
structures: Types of braiding processes, classification of braids, braid Pre-requisite(s): EC65
geometry, structure-property relationship, over braiding.
TXL321 Multi and Long Fibre Spinning
TXp232 Fabric Manufacture Laboratory-II
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222
Pre-requisite(s): TXP231/TXL231
Blending of fibres during staple fibre spinning , Characteristics of
Experiments related to the theoretical paper TXL232.
manmade fibres and their spinnability. Blending at draw frame.
Fundamentals of strictly similar yarns. Processing of manmade
TXL241 Technology of Textile preparation & Finishing
fibres and blends on staple fibre spinning system. Properties of
3 Credits (3-0-0) blended yarns. Spinning of dyed fibres. Mélange yarns. Worsted /
Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130 semi-worsted/Woolen spinning. Jute and Flax Spinning. Tow to top
Conversion. Bulk yarn. Spun silk yarn.
Natural and added impurities in textiles. Singeing, desizing, scouring,
bleaching, mercerisation and optical whitening of cotton. Combined
preparatory processes Carbonisation, scouring and bleaching of TXL331 Woven Textile Design
wool, degumming of silk. Preparation of synthetic fibres and blends,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
heat setting. Machinery for preparation of textiles. Surfactants and
their application. Introduction to chemical and mechanical finishes. Pre-requisite(s): TXL232
Chemical finishes for hand modification. Biopolishing, easy care, Elements of woven design. Construction of elementary weaves; plain,
oil, water and soil repellent finishes. Fire retardancy, antimicrobial twill, satin weaves and their derivatives. Rib and cord structures.
finishes. Finishes for wool. Mechanical finishes like shrink proofing and Construction of standard woven fabrics; poplin, sheeting, denim,
calendering; Raising, sueding and emerising. Low liquor application drill and jean, gabardine, granite, diamond and diaper weaves,
techniques and machinery; Stenters and dryers. Honey comb, Huckaback and Mockleno weaves. Colour effect on
woven design. Dobby design, stripes and checks. Construction of
TXp241 Technology of Textile preparation & Finishing Lab jacquard design. Figuring with extra threads. Damasks and Brocades.
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Double cloths. Multilayer fabrics. Tapestry structures. Gauze and
Leno structures. Whip cord and Bedford cord. Pique and Wadded
Pre-requisite(s): TXL111 or TXL130
structures. Terry pile structures. Velvet and velveteen. Axminster
Natural and added impurities in textiles. Singeing, desizing, scouring, carpet structures. Indian traditional designs. Introduction to CAD
bleaching, mercerization and optical whitening of cotton. Combined for woven designs.
preparatory processes Carbonization, scouring and bleaching of
wool, degumming of silk. Chemical finishes for hand modification.
Bio-polishing, Resin finishing, Water and Oil repellent finishes. Fire TXL361 Evaluation of Textile Materials
retardant finish, Antimicrobial finish, Weight reduction of cotton. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222 and TXL232
TXL242 Technology of Textile Coloration
Introduction to textile testing; Sampling and basic statistics: Selection
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of samples for testing; Random and biased samples; Different
Pre-requisite(s): TXL241/TXL111/TXL130 types of sampling of textile materials; The estimation of population
The principles of dyeing and printing of textile materials. Basic characteristics from samples and the use of confidence intervals;
characteristics of dyes, chemical structure of dyes, and classification Determination of number of tests to be carried out to give chosen
of dyes. Dyeing equipment and the specific dyes and procedures used degree of accuracy; Test of significance of means and variance;
to dye textiles. Evaluation of Fastness. Methods of printing namely, Related numerical; Quality control charts and their interpretation;
roller, screen, transfer, ink jet and the preparation of printing paste. Standard tests, analysis of data and test reports, Correlation and
Direct, discharge and resist printing styles. Physical chemistry of fibre/ coefficient of determination; Analysis of variance (ANOVA).
fabric dyeing. Physicochemical theories of the application of dyestuffs Testing methods: Measurement of length, fineness and crimp of fibres;
to textile and related materials, including the thermodynamics and Determination of maturity, foreign matter, and moisture content of
kinetic principles involved. cotton; Principles of AFIS, HVI etc.; Measurement of twist, linear
density and hairiness of yarn; Evenness testing of silvers, rovings
TXp242 Technology of Textile Coloration Lab
and yarns; Analysis of periodic variations in mass per unit length;
1.5 Credits (0-0-3) Uster classimat; Spectrogram and V-L curve analysis; Tensile testing
of fibres, yarns and fabrics; Automation in tensile testers; Tearing,
Pre-requisite(s): TXL241/TXL111/TXL130
bursting and abrasion resistance tests for fabrics; Pilling resistance of
The principles of dyeing and printing of textile materials. Dyeing
fabrics; Bending, shear and compressional properties of fabrics, fabric
equipment and the specific dyes and procedures used to dye textiles.
drape and handle (KESF, FAST etc); Crease and wrinkle behavior;
Evaluation of Fastness. Methods of printing namely, screen, transfer,
Fastness characteristics of textiles; Matching of shade; Air, water
ink jet and the preparation of printing paste. Direct, discharge and
and water-vapour transmission through fabrics; Thermal resistance
resist printing styles.
of fabrics; Testing of interlaced and textured yarns; Special tests for
carpets and nonwoven fabrics. Testing of special yarns (textured
TXD301 Mini project
yarns, core yarn, ropes, braids etc). Testing of special fabrics (different
3 Credits (0-0-6) types of nonwovens, carpets, different types of technical textiles like
bullet proof fabrics, UV protective fabrics, EMS fabrics etc.).
Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL221/TXL222/TXL231/TXL232
and EC65
TXp361 Evaluation of Textiles Lab
TXR301 professional practices 1 Credit (0-0-2)
2 Credits (0-1-2)
Pre-requisite(s): (TXL222/TXL221) and (TXL232/TXL231)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL221/TXL222/TXL231/TXL232 Introduction to textile testing; Experiments related to the lecture
and EC65 course entitled “Evaluation of Textile Material”.
310

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Textile and Fibre Engineering
TXL371 Theory of Textile Structures Formation of project team (up to two students and up to two faculty
4 Credits (3-1-0) guides); formulation of work plan completing targeted work for
the semester and presentation of complete work of progress for
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222 and TXL232 award of grade.
Basic characteristics of yarn structure. Koechlin’s theory relating yarn
count, twist, packing density, and diameter. Helical model of fibres in TXD402 Major project part II
yarns. Radial migration of fibres in yarns. Tensile behavior of yarns.
8 Credits (0-0-16)
Theory of yarn mass variation in spun yarn. Theory of plied yarn. Basic
characteristics of fabric structure. Flexible and rigid thread models Pre-requisite(s): EC100 and Minimum B Grade in TXD401
of woven fabric geometry. Tensile, bending, and shear deformation Continuation of planned tasks started in Major Project Part I, TXD411,
of woven fabric. Geometry of knitted structures and basic nonwoven to completion, thesis writing and presentation of complete work of
structures. progress for award of grade.
TXL372 Speciality Yarns and Fabrics TXL601 Basics of Textiles
2 Credits (2-0-0) 0 Credit (2-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222 and TXL232 This is an audit bridge course designed for M.Tech and Ph.D students
Design, manufacture, characterization and applications of with non-Textile background. The program is not available for B.Tech
specialty yarns. Hybrid yarns. High bulk yarns. Electro-conductive students. The course is divided into four modules giving an overview
yarns. Technical sewing threads. Coated yarns. Reflective yarns. on a) Fibre Science: Polymers, Textile Fibres and their classification,
Elastomeric yarns. Yarn quality requirement. Yarn preparation & Homopolymer, copolymers and graft polymers; their molecular
production technology. Structural design, properties-Performance and weight, distribution, architecture, configuration and confirmations,
applications of specialty fabrics. Denim. Pile fabrics. Narrow fabrics. amorphous and crystalline phases, glass transition, crystallization and
3D fabrics. Spacer fabrics. Profiled fabrics. Contour fabrics. Polar melting, Step growth and chain polymerization; Basic Introduction
fabrics. Spiral fabrics. Multi-functional fabrics, Leno fabric. to Fibre structure, general properties such as moisture absorption,
tenacity, elongation, initial modulus, yield point, toughness and
TXL381 Costing and its Application in Textiles elastic properties, Spinning, Melt spinning, Solution Spinning and
Electrospinning; Introduction to manmade and synthetic fibres:
4 Credits (3-1-0)
viscose, acetate, acrylic, nylon, polyester, introduction to high
Pre-requisite(s): EC75 performance fibers and their applications.
Importance of costing. Material costing in textile industry. Methods b) Yarn: Classification of yarn, filament and staple, yarn specifications,
of inventory costing. Economic order quantity, price discount, safety yarn counting system, yarn diameter, twist and yarn physical and
stock, lead time. Allocation of labour cost-shift premium, overtime, mechanical characteristics; Flow chart of cotton spinning process,
idle time, rush orders in garment industry. Allocation of overheads Importance of fibre characteristics, Impurities in natural fibres,
in composite mills. Job order costing in garment industry. Economic Cleaning principles, Mixing and blending of fibres; sliver formation by
batch quantity. Process costing in mill. Unit cost of yarns, fabric and card; Cardic mechanic configuration; Fibre configuration in card sliver,
processing. Joint and by-product costing. Absorption costing. Variable Drafting process, roller and apron drafting; Objectives of combing,
costing for decision making. Profit planning in textile industry, variation Principle of fibre fractionation; Principle of roving preparation and
of price, costs etc., breakeven capacity. Standard costs of fibres, yarns, yarn formation, Drafting and different methods of twisting.
labour etc. HOK, OHS, UKG etc. Cost variance analysis-iteration of
c) Fabric: Yarn to fabric conversion, Basic principles, Introduction to
actual costs of fibre, labour and overhead with respect to standard
various fabric formation principles, weaving, knitting, nonwoven and
costs. Work allocation to spinner. Balancing of machine for optimizing
braiding; Weaving principles-stages of woven fabric manufacturing
product mix in a spinning mill. Financial information-balance sheet,
winding, warping, sizing, Drawing in primary and secondary motions,
profit/loss account, balance sheet. Ratio analysis.
Shuttle and shuttle less looms, Basic fabric design as plain, matt,
rib, twill and satin; Knitting: basics warp and weft constructions,
TXL382 Applied Statistics for Textile Engineers
different knitting structures and their properties, weft and warp
Credits 3 (3-0-0)
knitting machines; Nonwovens: definitions, classifications, production
Pre-requisite(s): EC75 technology and applications; Braided structures and their technologies
and applications.
Overlap with: MSL719
d) Textile Chemical Processing: Natural and added impurities in
Techniques of sampling, random sampling, stratified sampling,
Textiles, singeing, desizing, scouring, bleaching, mercerization of
systematic sampling, cluster sampling. Descriptive statistics,
cotton; Carbonisation, scouring and bleaching of wool, Degumming
frequency distribution, histogram, stem and leaf plot, box plot,
of silk and Assessment processes; principles of dyeing and printing of
measures of central tendency, measures of dispersion. Probability
textile materials, basic characterstics of dyes, chemical structures of
distributions, basics of probability, hypergeometric, binomial, poisson,
dyes, classification, dyeing of cotton, polyester, wool/nylon; Methods
normal exponential, Chi-square, F, and t distributions, joint probability
of printing, preparation of printing pastes, Direct discharge and resist
distribution, central limit theorem, probability plot, goodness-of-fit
printing styles; Introduction to chemical and mechanical finishes;
tests. Inferential statistics, point and interval estimations of population
chemical finshes for hand modifications; Easy oil, water and soil
parameters, statistical test of hypothesis. Concept of correlation,
repellency; Fire retardant and antimicrobial finishes
types of correlation, index of correlation, rank correlation, partial
correlation. Simple linear regression, least square method, estimation
TXL700 Modelling and Simulation in Fibrous Assemblies
of regression coefficient, prediction of new observations, residual
analysis. Acceptance sampling plans for attributes and variables, 3 Credits (2-0-2)
single- and double- sampling plans. Operating characteristic curve, Pre-requisite(s): TXL232 and EC 75
acceptable quality level, rejectable quality level. Control charts,
Introduction to Textile Modelling and Simulation, types of model.
Shewhart control charts for variables and attributes, CUSUM control
Curve Fitting Techniques: Prediction of mechanical properties of
chart, moving average control chart, process capability analysis.
fibrous assemblies.
Use of statistical software packages. Practical textile applications
with examples. Artificial Neural Network (ANN): Mathematical models of artificial
neurons, ANN architecture, Learning rules, Back propagation
TXD401 Major project part I algorithm, Applications of ANN. Fuzzy Logic: Crisp and fuzzy sets,
Operations of fuzzy sets, Fuzzy rule generation, Defuzzification,
4 Credits (0-0-8)
Applications of fuzzy logic. Genetic Algorithm (G.A.): Basics of G.A.,
Pre-requisite(s): TXL361/TXP361/TXL371/TXL372 and EC 100 G. A. in fabric engineering.
311

Textile and Fibre Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Stochastic and Stereological Methods: Random fibrous assemblies, TXV706 Special Module in Fibre Science
anisotropy characteristics, two and three-dimensional fibrous 1 Credit (1-0-0)
assemblies. Statistical Mechanics: Monte Carlo simulation of random
fibrous assemblies. Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL221/TXL222/TXL231/TXL232
Multiscale Modelling: Geometrical modelling of textile structures, and EC 75
modelling of properties of fibrous assemblies The course aims at introducing new or highly specialized technological
Computational Fluid Dynamics: Newtonian and Non-Newtonian Fluids aspects in fibre science. The course topics and content are likely to
and their applications in extrusion processes, Computer simulation change with each offering depending upon the current requirement
of fluid flows through porous materials, heat and mass transfer in and expertise available with the department including that of the
fibrous assemblies. visiting professionals.
TXV701 process Cont. and Econ. in Manmade Fibre prod. TXV707 Special Module in Textile Chemical processing
1 Credit (1-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL221/TXL222/TXL231/TXL232 Pre-requisite(s): TXL241/TXL242
and EC 75 The course aims at introducing new or highly specialized technological
Introduction to manmade fibres. Consumption pattern in India aspects in textile chemical processing. The course topics and content
and World. Factors affecting their growth. Economics of manmade are likely to change with each offering depending upon the current
fibre production. Modern polyester manufacturing plant technology. requirement and expertise available with the department including
Capacities, raw materials and economics. Process and parameters that of the visiting professionals.
at polymerization. Melt spinning and draw line. Control of modulus,
TXL710 High performance and Specialty Fibres
tenacity, crimp properties, Dye affinity during production. Typical
properties of polyester staple fibre. Partially oriented yarn and fully 3 Credits (3-0-0)
drawn yarn. Commodity and specialty polyester fibres. Recycled
Pre-requisite(s): TXL212 and EC75
polyester staple fibres. Bio-degradable polyester PLA. Applications,
Definition, classification and structural requirements of high
properties and selection of fibres as per end uses.
performance and specialty fibres, Polymerization, spinning and
properties of aramids, aromatic polyesters, rigid rod and ladder
TXV702 Management of Textile Business
polymers such as PBZT, PBO, PBI, PIPD, Manufacture of carbon
1 Credit (1-0-0)
fibres from polyacrylonitrile, viscose and pitch precursors, Concept
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75 of gel spinning and spinning of UHMPE fibres, Elastomeric polymers
The textile industry of India : Past & its evolution to the present day. and fibres, Lyocell fibre production, Conducting fibres, Thermally
The structure of the Indian textile industry. Cotton textile sector, Jute and chemically resistant polymers and fibres, Methods of synthesis,
textile sector. Silk textile sector. Manmade textile sector. Wool textile production and properties of: glass and ceramic fibres. Specialty
sector. Statistics of Indian textile business (domestic & export) and fibres: profile fibres, optical fibres, bicomponent fibres and hybrid
world textile trade. Textile policy 2000. Govt. of India. World trade fibres, Superabsorbent polymers and fibres.
practices. Norms, barriers etc. Various pertinent issues prevailing
TXL711 polymer and Fibre Chemistry
impacting textile industry and trade. Corporate social responsibility.
Other compliances. ISO accreditation, etc. Retailing in textiles vis- 3 Credits (3-0-0)
a-vis consumer trend and behaviour. The challenging future of the The course will deal with chain and step growth polymerization
Indian textile industry and trade. methods, polymer’s macromolecular architecture, molecular weight of
polymers, copolymerization, cross-linked polymers, general structure
TXV 703 Special Module on Textile product Management and characteristics of polymers, spectroscopic analysis of polymers,
1 Credits (1-0-0) properties of fiber forming polymers and their applications.
Step wise process of product management shall be taught with focus
TXp711 polymer and Fibre Chemistry Laboratory
on Testiles. Starting with Understanding Market needs; Product
Development; Defining Product Specifications; Merchandising & 1 Credit (0-0-2)
Sourcing; Vendor Empanelment & Production Management; Packaging Identification of fibres by chemical and burning tests, polymerization
Development & Sourcing; Costing & Pricing; Product Launch & ending of vinyl monomers such as styrene, acrylamide using bulk
with Building the Brand. polymerization, solution polymerization, emulsion polymerization,
Each of the 9 steps shall be taught in detail with practical examples radiation induced polymerization. Condensation polymerization and
from the industry and using Terry Towels as the example. Wherever interfacial polymerization of nylon-6, Molecular weight measurement.
needed actual product samples shall be used as aid. Intrinsic viscosity and end group analysis, preparation of phenol-
formaldehyde resin. Analysis of chemical structure by FTIR, UV
TXV704 Special Module in Yarn Manufacture spectroscopy.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
TXL712 polymer and Fibre physics
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222 and EC 75
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The course aims at introducing new or highly specialized technological
Molecular architecture, configuration, conformation of ideal and real
aspects in yarn manufacture. The course topics and content are likely
chains, Random Walk models of polymer conformations, Gaussian
to change with each offering depending upon the current requirement
chain, Self-avoiding walks and excluded-volume interaction, the
and expertise available with the department including that of the
amorphous phase and its chemical-physical aspects, the glass
visiting professionals.
transition phenomenon, the WLF-equation, crystalline state and its
chemical-physical aspect, cross-linked polymers and rubber elasticity,
TXV705 Special Module in Fabric Manufacture
behaviour of polymers in solutions and mixtures, viscoelasticity and
1 Credit (1-0-0) rheology of polymers, mechanical properties, physical properties of
Pre-requisite(s): TXL232 and EC 75 fibres: moisture absorption properties, mechanical properties, optical
properties, thermal properties.
The course aims at introducing new or highly specialized technological
aspects in fabric manufacture. The course topics and content are
TXp712 polymer and Fibre physics Laboratory
likely to change with each offering depending upon the current
requirement and expertise available with the department including 1 Credit (0-0-2)
that of the visiting professionals. Laboratory Experiments on Characterization of fibres by Infrared
312

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Textile and Fibre Engineering
spectroscopy, Density measurements; Thermal analysis: method. Wet spinning or dry jet wet spinning of PAN copolymers.
Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA), Differential Scanning calorimetry False twist and air jet texturing processes. Determination of structure
(DSC) and Thermo-Mechanical Analysis (TMA); Dynamic Mechanical of textured yam under microscope.
Analysis (DMA); Sonic modulus ;X-ray diffraction studies;
Birefringence measurement; Optical microscopy studies; Scanning TXL719 Functional and Smart Textiles
Electron Microscopy (SEM) of fibres: Creep and Stress Relaxation
3 Credits (3-0-0)
study, Mechanical property testing such as tensile and flexural rigidity.
Pre-requisite(s): TXL212/TXL221/ TXL231 and EC75
TXL713 Technology of Melt Spun Fibres Definition and Classification of Functional and Smart textiles ;
Introduction to Composites : Theory, Types, Properties ; High
4 Credits (3-1-0)
Performance fibers, thermoplastic and thermosetting Resins;
Importance of transport phenomena in fibre manufacturing;
Composite Manufacturing and Applications; Coated and laminated
Fundamentals of momentum transfer, heat transfer, mass transfer,
Textiles: materials, formulations, techniques and applications ;
building differential equations using shell balance and generalized
Protective Textiles- Materials, design, principles and evaluation for
equations; Polymer rheology- shear flow, elongational flow; Melt
protection against fire, harmful radiation, chemicals and pesticides;
spinning lines for filament and staple fibre; Role of spin finish;
Sportswear: design, testing and materials – fibers , yarns, fabrics
Necessary conditions for fibre formation, elasticity versus plasticity
for temperature control and moisture management; Medical textiles:
of melts; Melt instabilities; Thermodynamic limitations; Force balance
Classification, types and products, Health and Hygiene Textiles-
and heat balance in melt spinning; Low speed melt spinning; Necking
protection against microbes, Wound management- dressings, suture
and stress induced crystallization in high speed melt spinning; Effect
and bandages, Implants and drug delivery systems ; Smart and
of process parameters on fibre spinning and structure of nylon
Intelligent Textiles : Passive and Active functionality, stimuli sensitive
6, PET and PP; Drawing Process and its necessity; Neck or flow
textiles, Electronic Textiles : wearable computers, flexible electronics.
deformational drawing; Drawing machines; Effect of parameters on
structure development in nylon 6, PET, PP; Types of heat setting,
TXL721 Theory of Yarn Structure
Effect of setting parameters on structure and properties; Concept of
3 Credits (3-0-0)
bulking/texturing.
General description of yarn structure, Packing of fibre arrangement
TXL714 Advanced Materials Characterization Techniques in yarns, Fibre directional arrangement in yarns, Geometry of pores
in yarns, Relationship among yarn count, twist, and diameter,
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Helical model of fibers in yarns, Yarn retraction, Limits of twisting,
Relevance of advanced characterization techniques in material Radial migration of fibers in yarns, Model of ideal fibre migration,
development; scattering techniques (SAXS/WAXS); advanced surface Model of equidistant migration, Tensile mechanics of yarns, Yarn
characterization techniques (X-ray photoelectrosn spectroscopy tensile behavior in light of helical model, Relationship between
(XPS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), secondary ion mass tensile behaviors of fiber and yarn, Yarn strength as a function of
spectroscopy (SIMS)); microscopy techniques: basics of electron- gauge length, Bending mechanics of yarns, Mass unevenness of
materials interaction; SEM combined with FIB techniques; TEM and yarns, Martindale’s model of mass irregularity, Model of hierarchical
cryo-TEM; chemical analysis utilizing microscopy techniques; AFM; structure of fibre aggregates, Hairiness of staple fiber yarns, Single-
confocal laser microscopy. and double-exponential models of yarn hairiness, Structure and
mechanics of plied yarns.
TXL715 Technology of Solution Spun Fibres
3 Credits (3-0-0) TXL722 Mechanics of Spinning processes
Pre-requisite(s): TXL711/TXL713 3 Credits (3-0-0)
PAN properties; Solution rheology and its dependence on parameters. Principles of bale management. Forces acting on fibres during opening
Effect of parameterson entanglement density, fibre spinning and and cleaning, analysis of fibre compactness and blending in blowroom.
subsequent drawing; Various solvent systems; Dope preparation; Wet Carding process, cylinder load and transfer efficiency, design of
and dry spinning processes; Effect of process parameters such as high production card, fibre shedding and card wire geometry, fibre
dope concentration, bath concentration, temperature and jet stretch configuration in card and drawn sliver. Fibre movement in drafting
ratio on coagulation rate, fibre breakage and fibre structure; Modeling field, drafting wave, drafting force, roller slip, roller eccentricity
of coagulation process; properties and structure of dry and wet spun and vibration, autolevelling. Fibre fractionation in comber, combing
fibres; Dry jet wet spinning. Solution spinning of PAN. performance. Analysis of forces on yarn and traveller, spinning tension
in ring and rotor spinning, spinning geometry, twist flow in ring and
Bicomponent and bulk acrylic fibres. Acrylic fibre line, crimping
rotor spinning, end breaks. Mechanism of drafting and yarn formation
and annealing, tow to top conversion systems; Viscose rayon
in high speed spinning systems.
process, Spinning with and without zinc sulfate; Polynosics and high
performance cellulosic fibre; Non viscose processes, Lyocell spinning
TXL724 Textured Yarn Technology
process, structure and properties; Gel spinning of PE, Gel spinning
of PAN and PVA. Introduction to high performance fibres and their 3 Credits (3-0-0)
spinning systems such as rigid rod polymer, liquid crystalline polymers,
Pre-requisite(s): TXL221/TXL222 and EC75
polylactic acid and spandex fibre manufacturing.
Principles of texturing and modern classification; False twist texturing
process- mechanisms and machinery, optimization of texturing
TXp716 Fibre production and post Spinning Operation
parameters, barre’, structure-property correlation of textured yarns;
Laboratory Draw-texturing- the need and fundamental approaches; Friction
2 Credits (0-0-4) texturing- the need and development, mechanics of friction texturing,
Experiments related to fibres production processes. Effect of latest development in twisting devices, optimization of quality
moisture and temperature on MFI of PET and PP. Melt spinning of parameters. Noise control in texturing.
PET, PP & nylon-6 filament yams on laboratory spinning machines. Air jet texturing- Principle, mechanisms, development of jets
Single and two stage drawing of the as-spun yams or industrial POY. and machinery, process optimization and characterization, air jet
Demonstration of high speed spinning machine. Wet and dry heat texturing of spun yarns. Air interlacement-Principle and mechanism,
setting of PET and nylon drawn yarns. Effect of temperature and jet development and characterization. Bulked continuous filament
tension on heat setting. Determination of structure and mechanical yarns- Need, principle, technology development. Hi-bulk yarns- Acrylic
properties of as spun, POY, drawn and heat set yams using DSC, X-ray, Hi-bulk yarn production, mechanism and machines involved, other
FTIR, density, sonic modulus. Effect of shear rate, temperature on such products. Solvent and chemical texturing- Need, texturing of
polymer solution viscosity using Brookfield Rheometer and ball-fall synthetic and natural fibres.
313

Textile and Fibre Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
TXL725 Mechanics of Spinning Machines TXL740 Science & App. of Nanotechnology in Textiles
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Drive systems, belt drives, belt tensions, power transmission, variable, Pre-requisite(s): EC75
PIV and reversing drives. Polygonal effect in chain drives. Gear types,
Introduction to Nanoscience and Nanotechnology; Size and surface
design aspects, interference and periodic faults, thrust loads and
dependence of their physical and chemical properties such as
elimination, gear selection, planetary gear trains in spinning machines.
mechanical, thermodynamical, electronic, catalysis etc; Synthesis
Design of cone pulleys, design of transmission shafts and drafting
of Nanomaterials used in Textiles such as carbon nanotube,
rollers-materials, design against torsional & lateral rigidity. Clutches
fullerenes, metal and metal oxide nanoparticles i.e. nano silver,
and brakes-design, torque transmission capacity and application in
nano silica, nano titania, nano zinc oxide, nano magnesium oxide
textile machines. Bearings- bush bearings, theory of lubrication,
etc.; Surface functionalization and Dispersion of nanomaterials;
rolling contact bearings in spinning machines. Machine balancing-
Nanotoxicity, Characterization techniques i.e. XRD, AFM, SEM/
static, couple and dynamic unbalance, balancing of card cylinder,
TEM, DLS etc.; Nanomaterial applications in textiles and polymers;
plane transposition, practical aspects of balancing, Cams in roving
Nanocomposites: definition types, synthesis routes; nanocomposite
and ring spinning machines.
fibres and coatings e.g. gas barrier, antimicrobial, conducting etc.;
Nanofibres: preparation, properties and applications i.e. filtration,
TXp725 Mechanics of Spinning Textile Machines tissue engineering etc.; Nanofinishing: self-cleaning, antimicrobial,
Laboratory UV protective etc.; Nanocoating on textile substrates: Plasma
1 Credit (0-0-2) Polymerisation, Layer-by-layer Self Assembly, Sol-Gel coating etc.
Students will do design analysis of various machine elements on
textile machines.
TXL741 Env. Manag. in Textile and Allied Industries
3 Credits (3-0-0)
TXL731 Theory of Fabric Structure
Pre-requisite(s): TXL221/TXL222/ TXL231/TXL232/
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Importance of ecological balance and environmental protection.
Engineering approach to fabric formation. Fibre, yarn and fabric
Definition of waste and pollutant. Pollutant Categories and types.
structure- property relationships. Crimp interchange in woven fabric.
International and Indian legislation and enforcing agencies in pollution
Elastica model for fabric parameters and crimp balance. Concept of
control. Waste management approaches; Environmental Management
fabric relaxation and set. Practical application of geometrical and
Systems’ ISO 14000. Environmental impact along the textile chain
elastica models, Uniaxial and biaxial tensile deformation of woven
from fibre production to disposal. Toxicity of intermediates, dyes and
fabric. Bending deformation of woven fabric, bending behaviour of
other auxiliaries etc. Pollution load from different wet processing
set and unset fabrics and bending in bias direction. Bending, Shear
operations. Textile effluents and their characterization. Technology
and drape properties of woven fabric. Buckling and compressional
and principles of effluent treatment. Advanced colour removal
behaviour of woven fabrics. Mathematical models and their application
technologies, Recovery and reuse of water and chemicals. Air and
in the study of tensile, bending, shear, compressional and buckling
noise pollution and its control. Eco labeling schemes. Industrial
deformation of woven fabrics. Structure and properties of knitted
hygiene and safe working practices. Analytical testing of eco and
fabrics, Structure-property relationship of nonwoven fabrics,
environmental parameters. Eco friendly textile processing: waste
Mechanical behavior of braided structures, Theory of fabric low stress
minimization. Standardization and optimization, process modification.
mechanical roperties and fabric hand, Fabric formality.
Safe & ecofriendly dyes and auxiliaries. Organic cotton, natural dyes,
naturally coloured cotton, Solid (fibre & polymer waste) recycling
TXL732 Advanced Fabric Manufacturing Systems recovery of monomers, energy recovery and chemical modification
3 Credits (3-0-0) of fibre waste.
Fabric manufacturing systems, Yarn quality and weavability, Yarn
Preparation for High speed weaving, Preparation of high performance
fibres/tows for weaving, Sizing of filament yarn, Shuttle less weaving TXL747 Colour Science
systems: Advancements in each system with respect to productivity, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
yarn characteristics and fabric quality, energy requirement, design
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
flexibility, applications and limitations, Specialty weaving: 3D weaving,
Colour and chemical constitution, physics and chemistry of light, vision,
Multilayer weaving, Spacer weaving, Profiled weaving, Polar and Spiral
colour. Physics of light sources, measurement of colour Colorimeters
fabric, Circular Weaving, Honeycomb weaving, Denim manufacturing,
and Spectrophotometers, Standard observer experiments, CIE system,
Multiaxial weaving, Multiphase weaving, Terry weaving, Leno
Tristiumulus values, and different colourorder systems. Principle
Weaving, Filament Weaving, Properties and applications of fabrics
of recipe prediction and demonstration, visual and instrumental
produced in these systems. Weft and warp knitted structures for
evaluation of whiteness, shade sorting, colour uncertainty, colour
technical applications, Braiding; biaxial and triaxial braids, 3D
constancy and metamerism, colour difference formulae, How we see
braiding, Structure, properties and applications of braided fabrics,
colour, colour in visual displays and use of colour in design.
Developments in nonwoven technologies, Stitch bonding methods,
Nonwoven composite fabrics, Electrospinning, 3D nonwovens.
TXL748 Advances in Finishing of Textiles
TXL734 Nonwoven processes and products
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overview of textile processing industry- current and future trends.
Pre-requisite(s): TXL232 and EC 75 Merging of technologies for creative solutions. Advances in
Definitions of nonwoven and their scopes and limitations. Staple fibre preparatory processes- bioscouring, combined processes, bleaching
preparation processes. Staple fibre web formation processes: carding, and mercerisation. Reducing water and energy consumption -
air-laying, and wet-laying. Staple fibre web stacking processes: Efficient liquor extraction, Low wet pick up and drying technologies.
parallel-laying, cross-laying, and perpendicular-laying, Mechanical Classification of finishes. Advance in mechanical finishes - calendering,
bonding processes: needle-punching and hydroentanglement. raising, emerising, softening. Principles and chemistry of Chemical
Thermal bonding processes: calendar, through-air, impingement, finishes - easy care, antimicrobial, anti UV, antistat, softening, Flame
infra-red, and ultrasonic bonding. Chemical bonding process. retardant, water repellent. Principle of repellency, oil, water and soil,
Spunmelt processes: spunbonding and meltblowing, Medical self-cleaning textiles. Wellness finishes for aroma, health and hygiene.
nonwovens, Hygiene nonwovens, Nonwoven wipes, Nonwoven filters, New technologies - microencapsulation, plasma, nanotechnology.
Geononwovens, Automotive nonwovens, Case studies. Finishing of technical textiles. Membranes and laminates.
314

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Textile and Fibre Engineering
TXp 748 Textile preparation and Finishing Lab on fabric mechanical and aesthetic properties, Fabric defects and
1 Credit (0-0-2) their impact on garment quality, Quality inspection and defects
in apparels, Evaluation of sewing threads, Evaluation of clothing
Pre-requisite(s): TXL747/TXL753 accessories, Material Functionality in clothing, Engineering of
Preparatory and finishing related project based experiments, functional clothing.
Chemistry and principle of each treatment and analysis of results.
TXp 751: Characterization of Chemicals and Finished
TXL 749 Theory and practice of Dyeing Textiles Lab
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1 Credit (0-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 Pre-requisite(s): B Tech. Textile/ BE Textile/ MSc Textile
Advances in dyes, Speciality dyes: photochromic, thermochromic, Evaluation, characterization and analysis of textile auxiliaries,
electrochromic, mechanochromic; Fluorescent and near IR dyes; chemicals, dyes, and water, Project based experiments for evaluation
Dyes for camouflage; Banned dyes; Safe and eco-friendly dyes, of the dyed and finished textiles.
natural dyes; Mechanisms of dyeing; Thermodynamics of dyeing;
Kinetics of dyeing; Dye-fibre interactions; Role of fibre structure
TXS751: Research Seminar
in dyeing; Advances in dyeing processes: low liquor, salt free, low
energy intensive dyeing; Dyeing of blends; Mass coloration of man- 1 Credit (0-0-2)
made fibres; Dyeing of speciality fabrics: stretch fabrics, light weight, Pre-requisite(s): TXT800
textured, garment dyeing, micro-denier fabrics, fibre dyeing; Effect
Presentation and discussion based on work done during internship
of finishes on shade and fastness; Dyeing faults and case studies.
or selected topics on current and future technologies.
TXp 749 Textile Coloration Lab
TXL752 Design of Functional Clothing
1 Credit (0-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): B.Tech. Textile / BE Textile / M.Sc. Textile
Pre-requisite(s): TXL241 and TXL242
Project based experiments in dyeing and colouration, dyeing of fabric,
visual and instrumental assessment of shade variation. Subjective Functional clothing - definition and classification. Techniques in design
vs objective evaluation, Shade sorting, whiteness index. Azo dye of functional clothing - 3D body scanning, human motion analysis,
synthesis and characterization. 2D/3D CAD and 3D modelling. Design of patterns, garment assembling
methods. Ergonomics in design of functional clothing. Principles and
TXL750 Science of Clothing Comfort practice of Anthropometrics. Biomechanical considerations in design of
clothing. Performance evaluation of performance clothing - subjective
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and objective methods, modeling and simulation. Human mechanics
Pre-requisite(s): TXL361 and EC75 and operational performance. Modelling, optimization and decision
Clothing Comfort: Brief introduction to the various processes related making techniques in design of functional clothing. Certification
to comfort, Application of science of clothing comfort. Psychology and and standardization. Case studies - swimwear, sportswear, pressure
comfort: basic concepts, Psychological research techniques, General garments, space suit, military clothing with a view to study specific
aspects and measurement of aesthetic properties, changes in aesthetic design and manufacturing considerations.
behaviour. Neurophysiological Processes of Comfort: Neurophysiologic
basis of sensory perceptions, Perceptions of sensations related to
TXR752 professional practices
mechanical, thermal and moisture stimuli. Thermal transmission:
1 Credit (0-0-2)
Thermoregulatory mechanisms of human body, heat transfer theories,
thermal conductivity of fibrous materials, steady state measurement Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
techniques for heat transfer, transient heat transfer mechanism: Interaction and discussion with experts from industry and academia
warm-cool feeling. Moisture Transmission: transfer of liquid moisture in the field of textiles and allied industries for sharing best practices
and vapour transfer through fibrous materials. Dynamic Transmission followed in the industry including case studies, Exposure to a variety
of heat and moisture: Relationship of moisture and heat, multiphase of topics and issues related to professional ethics.
flow through porous media, moisture exchange between fibre and
air, temperature and moisture sensations: theories and objective
measurement techniques, impact of microclimate. Tactile Aspects of TXL753 Advanced Textile printing Technology
Comfort: Fabric mechanical properties and tactile- pressure sensations 2 Credits (2-0-0)
like fabric prickliness, itchiness, stiffness, softness, smoothness,
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
roughness and scratchiness, fabric hand value, clothing comfort
Historical development in textile printing techniques and machines;
aspects in relations with garment size and fit.
limitations thereof; theoretical concepts of transfer printing and
scope; transfer printing inks, transfer paper, machines and process
TXL751 Apparel Engineering and Quality Control
conditions; concept of digital printing, technology and challenges
3 Credits (2-0-2) thereof, machines and principles, continuous jet verses drop-
Pre-requisite(s): TXL211/TXL221/TXL222/TXL231/TXL232 on-demand, suitability of inks for different class of fibre/ fabrics,
and EC75 auxiliaries needed, issues related to standardization, pre- and post-
printing operations, scale and economics of operation. Printing faults
Introduction to clothing manufacture, Apparel Engineering
and related process control principles, novel printing methods, raised,
Concept in Garment Industry, Need of Apparel engineering, Role
plasma, fancy, 3-D effects.
and Methodology of Apparel Engineering, Industrial engineering
concept in apparel engineering, Standardization and Production
scheduling, Sewing Dynamics, Mechanics of sewing operation, TXL 754 Sustainable Chemical processing of Textiles
Measurement and controls in sewing operation, Automation in
2 Credits (2-0-0)
sewing process, Modeling of sewing machine and operation, Fabric
quality assessment for clothing industry, Evaluation and Application Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
of low stress mechanical properties for making up process, Fabric Concept of Sustainability, Green processing technologies – low liquor
mechanical properties and sewing operation interaction, Concept technologies, ozone, super critical carbon dioxide and ultrasound
of Tailorability, Formability and Lindberg theory, Quality control in technologies. Technologies using organic and natural fibers, process
apparel manufacturing, Determination of sewability, Effect of sewing technologies using new enzymes and foam technology, lowsalt
315

Textile and Fibre Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
reactive dyes, combined dyeing and finishing, Industrial hazardous V, I), circuit laws and theorems. Overview of basic digital electronics:
waste management, in-plant management, reduction, recycling and Gates and ICs. Sensors and transducers (displacement, position,
disposal of waste. Hazards involved in chemical processing and laws force, temperature, pressure, flow). Control elements, systems and
related to environmental protection. Life cycle analysis with case examples. Data acquisition, analysis, control and automation by
studies, compliance, certification, social accountability and ethical microprocessors and micro controllers. Motor and power drives. Power
practices. Concept of eco-labels, ISO 14024:2018. control devices. Some applications of data acquisitions and control
systems in textiles and case studies.
TXL755 Textile Wet processing Machines: Automation
and Control TXL772 Computational Methods for Textiles
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Numerical analysis, First-degree approximation methods, Linear
Pre-requisite(s): TXL241 and TXL242
algebraic equations, ordinary differential equations, interpolation,
Basic concepts of fluid flow, heat and mass transfer with specific
Fundamentals of Computer Programming, Programming Methodology:
emphasis on textile processes, Feedback control principles and
Structured Programming and concepts of Object-Oriented
systems, Sensors and transducers used in chemical processing
Programming. Programming in C++ - Statements and Expressions,
machines; Machinery for processing of textiles in fibre, yarn and fabric
Control statements. Structure, Functions: Function Overloading
form, batch and continuous machines. Machines for pre-treatment,
etc. C++ as Object-Oriented Programming Language- Classes and
dyeing, printing and finishing, developments in machinery for
Objects, Data Abstraction, Inheritance - Multilevel and Multiple
improving the effectiveness of treatment and reduction in chemical,
inheritance etc., Polymorphism - operator overloading and virtual
energy and water consumption, mechanical finishing machines,
functions, file handling. Application development using C++.
garment processing.
TXL773 Medical Textiles
TXL756 Textile Auxiliaries
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Natural and synthetic polymers and Textile-based techniques used for
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 medical application, Fibrous extracellular matrix of human body and
Auxiliaries in textile chemical processing; Surfactants, emulsifiers, their characteristic features, Cell-Polymer interaction, Non-implantable
wetting agents, dispersing agents, foaming agents. Buffers, materials (Wound-dressing, related hydrogel and composite products,
Electrolytes, Sequestering agents, enzymes, Sizing agents, thickeners, Bandages, Gauges), Implantable biomedical devices (Vascular grafts,
Binders, Fluorescent brightening agents, Oxidising and reducing Sutures, Heart valves), Extra-corporeal materials (Scaffolds for Tissue
agents, discharging agents, stain removing agents. Environmental engineering, Rapid prototyping, Cartilage, Liver, Blood Vessel, Kidney,
assessment. Urinary bladder, Tendons, Ligaments, Cornea), Healthcare and hygiene
products (Surgical Gowns, masks, wipes, Antibacterial Textiles, Super
TXp761 Evaluation of Textile Materials absorbent polymers, Dialysis, Soluble factor release), Safety, Legal
and ethical issues involved in the medical textile materials.
2 Credits (0-0-4)
Evaluation of clothing comfort, flammability, bursting strength,
TXL774 process Control in Yarn & Fabric Manufacturing
bandage pressure, UPF, impact resistance, pore size and
filtration efficiency. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75
TXL766 Design and Manufacturing of Textile Structural Basics of automatic control, Statistical considerations in process
Composites control. Online and offline control measures in spinning. Control of
3 Credits (3-0-0) yarn quality attributes. Spinning process performance. Post spinning
problems. Control of winding, warping, sizing, weaving and knitting
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75
processes. Control of fabric defects and value loss. Yarn quality
Definition of composites, textile composites and textile structural requirement and assessment for weaving.
composites, Textile materials for composites, Matrix and
Reinforcements, Classification of Textile Reinforced Structures based
TXL775 Technical Textiles
on axis and dimension; non-axial, mono-axial, biaxial, triaxial and
multiaxial structures, UD, 2D,3D structures, Structural anisotropy, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
parallel arrangement and series arrangement of components, Chopped Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75
strand and Milled fibres, Hybrid fabrics, Non-crimp fabrics, Laminates,
Definition, classification, products, market overview and growth
Stitched structure, Embroidery structures, Composite Rope, Design,
projections of technical textiles. Fibres, yarns and fabric structures
manufacture and applications of reinforcements, Manufacture
in technical textiles and their relevant properties. Type and important
and characterization of extra-light 3D hollow textile structures
characteristics of sewing threads. cords, ropes, braids and narrow
for composites, Methods of composite processing, Manufacturing
fabrics. Textile and other filter media for dry and wet filtration.
techniques of complex structural Composites, Characterization of
Fibre and fabric selection for filtration. Types and application of
structural Composites, Theory of composites, Composite concepts
geosynthetics. Fibres and fabric selection criteria for geotextile
and theory, Rule of mixture, the synergy effect, Logarthmic mixing
applications. Application of textiles in automobiles. Requirement and
rule, Geometry of reinforcement, Particular, granular, fibrillar, lamellar,
design for pneumatic tyres, airbags and belts. Clothing requirements
Properties of components, properties of interface, mechanism of
for thermal protection, ballistic protection. Materials used in bullet
adhesion, Mechanics of composite, Failure theory, Damage analysis,
proof and cut resistant clothing. Material, method of production and
Modeling and simulation of various reinforcement structures and
areas of application of agrotextiles. Different types of fabrics used
their composites, Applications of Textile structural composites, Textile
for packaging. Methods of production and properties of textiles used
Reinforced Concretes, Fibre concrete bonding, textile structure
in these applications.
reinforcement concrete architecture, Characterization and applications
of reinforced concretes.
TXL777 product Design and Development
TXL771 Electronics and Controls for Textile Industry 3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2) Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75
Overview of electronics and controls in modern textiles equipments Introduction to product development, distinguishing features of
and machines. Overview of basic analog electronics: Elements (R, L, C, textile products, and its classification. Generic product development
316

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Textile and Fibre Engineering
process, identifying customer need and its analysis, development factorial designs. Fractional factorial designs. Robust design. Mixture
of specification, need to metric conversion. Concept generation experiments. Central composite and Box-Behnken designs. Response
methodology, concept selection. Material selection, performance surface methodology. Multi-response optimization. Analysis of
characteristics of apparel, home textile and technical products, variance. Statistical test of hypothesis. Analysis of multiple linear
criterion for material selection. Role of fibre, yarn and fabric and regression. Use of statistical software packages.
finishing process on product performance. Industrial design,
ergonomics and aesthetics, Product architecture, Anthropometric
TXL784 Supply Chain Management in Textile Industry
principles, fit. Principles of prototyping, 3 D computer modeling,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
free-form fabrication. Design options for improving properties and
functional attributes of different products. Design logic for developing Definition, objectives, stages and metrics of textile supply chain;
selected products, Analysis of products; Calculation of design Life cycle of textile products, demand and fashion forecasting,
parameters for a given end use, developing detail specification for forecasting techniques, bull-whip effect, aggregate forecasting in
each structural element. apparel industry; Designing of textile supply chain network, make vs
buy and location decisions of textile SCM, reverse logistics in textile
SCM; Risk mitigation in global textile supply chain, coordination among
TXL780 principles of Characterization of Functional and
fabric, apparel and accessories manufacturers, role of dominant
Technical Textiles
power; Transportation and distribution strategies; Supplier selection
3 Credits (3-0-0) in textile SCM, quantitative models; Lean, agile and leagile textile
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 for TT1; None for others supply chains and their enablers, designing resilient textile supply
chain; Push-pull supply chain, decoupling point in textile SCM; Green
Characterization of low stress mechanical and transmission (heat
and low carbon textile supply chain; Case studies related to textile
and moisture) characteristics of functional textiles. Characterization
and apparel supply chains.
of various technical textile materials: extreme heat, fire and cold
protective clothing; geotextiles; filter fabrics; 'fiber reinforced
composites; electromagnetic shielding textiles; compression TXL785 Heat and Mass Transport in Fibrous Materials
bandages; ballistic protective textiles; UV protective textiles; Hygiene Credits: 3 (3-0-0)
and medical textiles; Automotive textiles; etc. Analysis of test results.
Pre-requisite(s): TXL111/TXL221 for UG students
TXL781 project Appraisal and Finance Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluid, viscosity, Reynolds number,
Bernoulli equation, Fluid flow through pipe; Thermal conduction
3 Credits (3-0-0)
through fibrous media- Fourier's law, thermal conductivity, steady
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75 state heat conduction, Effective thermal conductivity for fibrous
Introduction to Project Finance - Description of Project Finance materials; Convective heat transfer through fibrous media- the
Transaction, difference between corporate finance and project concept of heat transfer coefficient, macroscopic equations governing
finance, Indian Financial system, Structuring the Project, Limited heat and mass transfer in textile material, generalized Darcy's law,
Resource Structures, Capital Investments : Importance & Difficulties, mass and energy conservation, thermodynamic relations; Surface
CPV analysis, Financial statements, Financial statement analysis, tension, wetting and wicking in a fibrous material; Moisture diffusion,
Working capital management, Inventory management, Project estimation of ventilation rate, heat and moisture transport in clothing
cycle, Project Formulation, Project Appraisal, Financial appraisal, by ventilation; Phase change in textile- moisture condensation and
Economic Appraisal, Social Cost Benefit Analysis- Shadow Prices evaporation; Air filtration using fibrous media-Fibre size effect, SFFE.
and Economic rate of return, Financing Projects, Sources of funding,
Valuing Projects, NPV, IRR, MIRR, Real Options, Decision Trees and
TXL786 Technology of Textile Coating and Lamination
Monte Carlo Simulations, Financial Estimates & projections, Technical
Analysis, Market & Demand Analysis, Investment Criteria, Cost of 3 Credits (2-0-2)
capital, Project Risk analysis, Sensitivity Analysis, Leverage analysis, Pre-requisite(s): None for TTF, TTE, TTC and TTZ; TXL241,
Environment Appraisal of the project and Detailed Project Report, TXL242, TXP241, TXP242 for TT1
Case studies on Textile projects.
Materials for coating: Polymers, textile materials. Adhesives
Compounding of polymers for coating, Methods of Coating, Films
TXL782 prod. & Operations Management in Textile for lamination, Methods of lamination, Technical Products based
Industry on coating/lamination Coated and laminated textile products,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Environmental aspects of coating/lamination Laboratory experiments
includes coating of fabric with PVC, PU, acrylic, EVA, Silicones, PTFE
Pre-requisite(s): TXL222/TXL232 and EC 75
polymers, rubber coating etc., Basic lamination with films.
Indian textile industry scenario. Textile Policy. Production
andoperations management function. Operation strategy. Facility
location and capacity planning. Production planning and control, TXT800: Industrial Summer Training
aggregate planning, scheduling, PERT and CPM, product mix linear Non-Credit Mandatory for TCP
programming concepts. Inventory models, optimal order quantity,
Pre-requisite(s): TXL747/TXL753/TXL749
economic manufacturing batch size, classification of materials,
Non-Credit course. The students will be required to undergo
materials requirement planning, Just in time concept. Supply chain
summer internship in a textile industry and present the experience
Management. Maintenance management. Plant modernisation. Motion
of internship.
and time study. Job evaluation and incentive scheme. Productivity,
partial and total productivity, machine, labour and energy productivity,
efficiency and effectiveness, benchmarking, measure to increase TXD801 Major project part-I (TXE)
productivity. Forecasting, methods of forecasting. Total quality
6 Credits (0-0-12)
management and Six Sigma. Product pricing. Financial and profit
To learn about preparation of research plan and systematically carry
analysis, investment decisions. Management information system.
out research project.
TXL783 Design of Experiments and Statistical Techniques
TXD802 Major project part-I (TXF)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Objectives, principles, terminologies, guidelines, and applications of 6 Credits (0-0-12)
design of experiments. Completely randomized design. Randomized To learn about preparation of research plan and systematically carry
block design. Latin square design. Two level and three level full out research project.
317

Textile and Fibre Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
TXD803 Major project part-II (TXE) TXS806 Independent Study (TTF)
12 Credits (0-0-24) 3 Credits (0-3-0)
Pre-requisite(s): TXD801 Student should undertake a research oriented activity including
software development, machine design and development, product &
To learn about preparation of research plan and systematically carry
process development, instrumentation and in-depth study of a subject
out research project.
which is outside the regular courses offered in the program. This study
should be carried out under the guidance of a faculty member. The
TXD804 Major project part-II (TXF)
subject area chosen by the student should be sufficiently different
12 Credits (0-0-24) from the area of major project being pursued by the student.
Pre-requisite(s): TXD802 The student should submit a detailed plan of work to the program
To learn about preparation of research plan and systematically carry coordinator before approval of registration for the course. The student
out research project. registered for this course should give one mid-term presentation
followed by a final presentation before a committee constituted by
the program coordinator.
TXD805: Major project part I (TCp)
6 Credits (0-0-12) TXL807 Seminar (Textile Engineering)
Project work related to the area. 2 Credits (0-2-0)
A comprehensive literature review on a research topic of current
TXD806: Major project part II (TCp) interest or futuristic, pertaining to a textile process or product or
technology. Student should perform a comprehensive literature review
12 Credits (0-0-24)
on a research topic of current interest or futuristic, pertaining to a
Pre-requisite(s): TXD805 textile process or product or technology. The student should give an
Project work related to the area. outline of the review and get approval from the program coordinator
for registration of this course. The student registered for this course
should give one mid-term presentation followed by a final presentation
TXS805 Independent Study (Textile Engineering)
before a committee constituted by the program coordinator.
3 Credits (0-3-0)
Student should undertake a research oriented activity including TXD809 Mini project (Textile Engineering)
software development, machine design & development, product & 4 Credits (0-0-8)
process development, instrumentation and in-depth study of a subject
This is an open ended course where the students are expected to
which is outside the regular courses offered in the program. This study
design and develop a product or equipment or instrument relevant
should be carried out under the guidance of a faculty member. The
to the field of textile technology. In this process, the students are
subject area chosen by the student should be sufficiently different
expected to demonstrate their ability to think on their own in design
from the area of major project being pursued by the student.
and development of hardware item. They are also expected to put
The student should submit a detailed plan of work to the program down their thinking process in a report form with relevant literature
coordinator before approval of registration for the course. The student background, methodology of design and development process
registered for this course should give one mid-term presentation and should have conducted some experiments with the developed
followed by a final presentation before a committee constituted by hardware system. Finally, they need to present their work for the
the program coordinator. award of grade.
318

Centre for Applied Research in Electronics
CRL601 Basics of Statistical Signal Analysis higher dimensions: Rectangular arrays; Circular arrays; Spherical
3 Credits (2-0-2) arrays; Cylindrical arrays.
Fundamentals of signals and systems, LTI systems, convolution,
CRL706 Selected Topics in Radars and Sonars
Fourier transforms, Z- transform, sampling and Nyquist criteria, set &
probability theory, random variables, probability density / distribution 3 Credits (3-0-0)
functions, moments, characteristic and moment generating functions, The Radar and Sonar Equations: Basic System Parameters; Radar and
transformation of a random variable, random process, stationarity, Sonar Applications; Signal Design for range and Doppler resolution:
ergodicity. Ambiguity functions, waveforms for CTFM/FMCW, MTI Radar, Pulse
Lab experiments using MATLAB will be given to understand the Doppler Radar; Detection theory for target extraction from clutter/
practical aspects of these concepts. reverberation and noise (clutter/reverberation modeling); Synthetic
Aperture Radar/Sonar; Target Tracking: active/passive, Monopulse
CRL611 Basics of RF and Microwaves Radar; Modern Techniques: thru-the-wall imaging, multi-static
3 Credits (2-0-2) systems.
Basic electromagnetics, plane waves and scattering, waveguide
CRL707 Human & Machine Speech Communication
modes, Fourier series and transform, autocorrelation and power
spectral density, holes and electrons in semiconductors, p-n junction. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overview of human and machine speech communication: Applications;
CRL621 Fundamentals of Semiconductor Devices Speech signal measurement and representation. Speech science
3 Credits (3-0-0) topics: Speech production and phonetics: Speech production
Si Crystal structure, crystal planes and directions, band formation in mechanism; Articulatory and acoustic phonetics; Speech production
semiconductors, direct and indirect gap semiconductors, E-k diagram, model; International Phonetic Alphabet; Phonetic transcription;
concept of “hole” as charge particle, effective mass, carrier mobility, Hearing and perception. Speech signal analysis: Time domain
life time of carriers, recombination, doping of semiconductors, drift analysis; Spectrum domain analysis; Spectrogram; Cepstrum domain
and diffusion currents in semiconductors, metal-semiconductor analysis; Pitch estimation; Voicing analysis; Linear prediction analysis.
junctions, ohmic and non-ohmic contacts, Schottky diode, abrupt p-n Engineering applications: Speech coding; Speech quality assessment:
junction, energy- band diagram, junction under zero-bias, forward bias Subjective and objective evaluation of quality; Automatic speech
and reverse bias; current calculations, break-down in p-n junction, recognition: HMM; Language models; Keyword spotting; Text-to-
diffused p-n junction; bipolar transistor: theory and operation; speech synthesis: Concatenative and HMM speech synthesis; Prosody
theory of MOS FET, ideal MOSFET, threshold voltage, sub-threshold modification.
conduction in MOSFET, C-V characteristics of MOS capacitor, short- The course will include audio demonstrations and require students to
channel effects. do practical exercises with recorded speech signals. An isolated word
speech recognizer using open source resources shall be designed.
CRL702 Architectures and Algorithms for DSp Systems
4 Credits (2-0-4) CRL708 Sonar System Engineering
Lectures: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction – DSP Tasks and Applications, Real-time Signal Processing, Introduction to Sonar applications, Units, Sonar Equations and their
Representation of DSP algorithms; Number Representations and limitations, Propagation of sound, Transmission loss, Ambient Noise,
Arithmetic Operations - Fixed point and floating point representations Spatial Correlation, Directivity Index, Array Gain, Beam-patterns,
and arithmetic operations; Q notation; Digital Signal Processor Projector Source level, Reverberation, Scattering by targets, echo
Architectures – CPU, Peripherals; Specific DSP processor architecture; formation, Radiated Noise and Self Noise, Transmission and Reception
DSP Instruction Set and Assembly Language Programming – modes, Dynamic Range Compression and Normalisation, Receiver
Instruction types; Parallel programming; Pipelining; Efficient Beamforming techniques, Sidelobe nulling, Detection Performance
programming; DSP Algorithms and their Efficient Implementation - a) issues, Performance prediction, Sonar System Design examples.
Linear filtering; b) FFT and spectrum analysis; c) Scalar and vector
quantization, source coding, linear prediction coding; d) Function CRL709 Underwater Electronic Systems
generation; Software Design for Low Power Consumption. 3 Credits, (3-0-0)
The DSP architecture and assembly language programming will Introduction to High Resolution Underwater Imaging Applications,
be studied in lectures and laboratory with reference to a specific Sidescan Sonar principles, Sector Scan Sonar Principles: Principle
DSP processor. of within-pulse scanning, role of grating lobe in sector coverage,
Laboratory: Swept-frequency delay line scanning technique, Time-Delay-
1. Basic DSP algorithms using MATLAB, 2. Familiarization with DSP Integrate scanning technique, Modulation Scanning Technique:
kit, 3. Real-time filtering, 4. PN Sequence generation, 5. FFT, 6. Multi-stage scanning, Spatial DFT-based imaging technique, True
Lab project. Phase-Shift beamforming: Near-field focusing, Hilbert-transform
based implementation, Synthetic Aperture Sonar: range migration
CRL704 Sensor Array Signal processing issue, PRF limits, swath coverage, real beam pattern effects, tow-
body precision issues, CTFM Sonar, Dual Demodulation CTFM Sonar
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Phase-Difference based SAS, Radial Projection method of imaging,
Representation of space - time signals: Coordinate systems;
Monopulse technique, Navigation: Doppler Log, JANUS system,
propagating waves; wave number-frequency space; arrays and
Localization: LBL (Long baseline), SBL (Short baseline), SSBL/USBL
apertures; space-time random processes and their characterization;
(super/ultra short baseline), requirements of tracking and positioning
Signal modeling and optimal filters: AR, MA, ARMA models;
systems, hyperbolic and spherical-based localization using pingers
Autocorrelation and power spectral density; linear MMSE estimator;
and transponders, Passive Inverse Synthetic Aperture for localizing
optimum filters; Power spectrum estimation: Non-parametric and
radiated tonals from moving platforms, Underwater Acoustic
parametric methods; Arrays and spatial filters: Frequency-wavenumber
Communication Modems and their applications.
response and beam patterns; ULA; Performance measures; Synthesis
of linear arrays and apertures: Spectral weighting; array polynomials;
CRL711 CAD of RF and Microwave Circuits
pattern sampling in wavenumber space, minimum beamwidth for
specified sidelobe levels, broadband arrays; Optimum beamforming: 4 Credits (3-0-2)
MVDR beamformers; MMSE beamformers; Eigenvector beamformers; Review of basic microwave theory: Transmission lines-concepts
Adaptive beamforming: Least mean squares algorithms; Recursive of characteristics impedance, reflection coefficient, standing and
least squares; Generalized sidelobe canceler; Array geometries in propagating waves, equivalent circuit. Smith chart, Network analysis:
319

Applied Research in Electronics Courses of Study 2024-2025
Z, ABCD, Y, T, S-parameters, Impedance matching technique, quantum resistance, quantum conductance; Scattering at quantum
Implementation using simulators. Planar transmission lines. Filters- levels: quantum contacts, quantum interference, Andrev scattering,
lumped as well as distributed element realization, Implementation spin-dependent scattering; Coulomb blockade, Resonant tunneling,
using simulators. Direction couplers and Power divider. Quantum capacitance, Single electron and tom transistors: coulomb
Familiarization of photolithography process, mask making using blockade memory and logic devices, single electron invertors; Electron
intellicad and measurement using Automatic Network Analyzer in the transport through single molecule: molecular transistors, memories
laboratory classes. Design, optimization, fabrication and testing of and switches; Spinning of electron: spin valve and transistors, Sub-
Microstrip components and determining equivalent circuits. band quantum devices: quantum wells, wires an dots, sub band
infrared and terahertz detectors; Quantum bit: quantum computers,
CRL712 RF and Microwave Active Circuits different types of qubit, initialization, quantum manipulation, readout,
charge qubit, phase and flux qubit, spin qubit.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Microwave Amplifier theory and design. Theory and design of
microwave phase shifters, switches and attenuator. Analysis of CRL729 Sensors and Transducers
microwave mixers. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to sensors and transducers, basic parameters and
CRL715 Radiating Systems for RF Communication
principles and applications of various sensors and transducers
3 Credits (3-0-0) in characterization of materials, devices, circuits and systems;
Revision of Maxwell’s equations,radiation, Poynting vector; antenna Acoustic and Ultrasonic sensors and transducers; Magnetic and
parameters like gain, radiation pattern, VSWR wire antennas – dipole Electrical sensors and transducers; Thermal sensors and transducers;
monopole; antenna arrays; aperture antennas and equivalence Radiation including Optical sensors and transducers; Smart Sensors
theorems; printed antennas, scattering. for characterization of RF materials, devices, circuits and systems;
Mechanical and Thermal Engineering issues for RF Modules/
CRL722 RF and Microwave Solid State Devices Instruments; Typical applications and use of transducers in systems/
instruments.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of basics of semiconductor devices. Schottky diode, qualitative
description, junction properties, I-V characteristics in forward and CRL731 Selected Topics in RFDT-I
reverse biased diodes, high frequency application of Schottky 3 Credits (3-0-0)
diode, Schotty barrier gate FET. GaAs MESFET I-V characteristics, Advanced course on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech.
High Electron Mobility Transistor (HEMT), Hetro-structures, SOI Program.
technologies and MOSFETs, Fabrication technologies for GaAs MESFET,
MBE, Ion Implantation. Pattern transfer at sub-micron level.
CRL732 Selected Topics in RFDT-II
CRL724 RF and Microwave Measurements 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Advanced course on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech.
Theory of operation of network analyzer, and spectrum analyzer. Program.
VNA calibration, synthesized signal generation, noise measurement,
measurement of antenna properties. CRL733 Selected Topics in RFDT-III
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CRL725 Technology of RF and Microwave Solid State
Advanced course on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech.
Devices
Program.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Review of semiconductor device processing technologies: process
CRL734 Selected Topics in RFDT-IV
sequence development for a representative MOS technology,
overview of oxidation, diffusion, mask making, pattern transfer, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
etching, metallization etc., process integration. Techniques of Advanced course on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech.
metallization: Introduction to vacuum systems. Sputtering (DC,RF Program.
and magnetron), e-beam evaporation for ohmic and Schottky. Contact
formation, silicides for gate and interconnect. Fine line lithography
CRp718 RF and Microwave Measurement Lab
process: optical lithography, x-ray and e-beam lithography, lift-off
4 Credits (1-0-6)
techniques. Wet and plasma assisted etching techniques, RIE, RIBE.
Introduction to Ion Implantation, Molecular Beam Epitaxy. Chemical Laboratory experiments based on network analyzer, spectrum
Vapour Deposition (epitaxial growth, polycrystalline, silicon, dielectric analyzer, antenna pattern measurement, thermography, data
films, flow pressure and plasma chemical deposition), Atomic layer acquisition and digitization.
deposition. GaAs MESFET technology.
CRp723 Fabrication Techniques for RF and Microwave
CRL726 MEMS Design and Technology
Devices
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (1-0-4)
Introduction, origin and driving force for MEMS; extension of IC
Concept of process flow in IC fabrication, representative process flow
technologies for MEMS fabrication, major technologies for MEMSL:
for diode/MOSFET. High temperature processes;oxidation, diffusion,
bulk and surface micromachining, LIGA process anisotropic etching
and annealing. Use of masks in IC fabrication, mask design and
of silicon, piezoresistive -piezoelectric effect, piezoresistive silicon
fabrication., Photolithography processes. Chemical etching processes:
based pressure sensor, capacitive pressure sensor, RF switch
dry and wet etching. Vacuum and vacuum systems. Thin films in
design, fabrication and characterization, actuation in MEMS, MEMS
IC processing, resistive evaporation, ebeam, RF and DC sputtering
accelerometer design, fabrication, vibration sensor, energy harvesting
processes. Concept of test chip design and process parameter
devices, piezoelectric materials for MEMS, MEMS based RF and
extraction. Practicals: Vacuum system, Thermal evaporation, DC/RF
microwave circuits.
puttering, Mask making techniques: Coordinatograph/Photo-plotter
first Reduction Camera, Step and Repeat process, Photolithography
CRL727 Introduction to Quantum Electron Devices
process, Etching techniques, Oxidation/diffusion processes,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Diode fabrication, Band Pass filter fabrication, Measurement
The foundation of quantum electronics; Nanoscale resistors: equipment calibration.
320

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Applied Research in Electronics
CRS735 Independent Study CRV743 Special Module in Radio Frequency Design and
3 Credits (0-3-0) Technology-II
Advanced course on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech. 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Program. Advanced module on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech.
program.
CRV741 Acoustic Classification using Passive Sonar
1 Credit (1-0-0)
CRD802 Minor project
The challenges faced by a sonar designer, involved in developing
3 Credits (0-0-6)
underwater classification systems will be introduced and possible
solutions will be discussed. The radiated noise characteristics from The project work shall be specific to each student.
marine vessels and the unique characteristics of the acoustic signature
with respect to the class of the marine platform will be presented. CRD811 Major project-I
Recent research work has shown that classical homomorphic signal
6 Credits (0-0-12)
processing techniques and other channel inversion techniques can
The project work shall be specific to each student.
be used to significantly reduce the unwanted underwater channel
distortions that otherwise affect the classifier performance drastically.
The course shall provide insight into some of the methods that can CRD812 Major project-II
improve sonar classification performance. 12 Credits (0-0-24)
The project work shall be specific to each student.
CRV742 Special Module in Radio Frequency Design and
Technology-I
CRD814 Major project-III
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Advanced module on selected topics of relevance to the RFDT M.Tech. 6 Credits (0-0-12)
program. The project work shall be specific to each student.
321

Centre for Atmospheric Sciences
ASL320 Climate Change: Impacts, Adaptation and to climate models for simulating and predicting the Indian monsoon
Mitigation system and its variability, Inter-annual to decadal variability of the
monsoon system, Seasonal prediction of monsoon, Intra-seasonal
4 Credits (3-0-2)
variability of monsoon (Active and Break periods), Long term (multi-
Elements of physical climatology, climate variability; anthropogenic
decadal to century scale) variability of monsoon, Tropical cyclones
causes of climate change; concepts of radioactive forcing climate
over the monsoon region, Changing monsoon under changing climate,
feedbacks and climate sensitivity; Observed climate record and paleo
Natural versus Anthropogenic climate change, Global warming and
reconstruction, modeling aspects of the climate system; Carbon
its causes, Evidences of global warming evidences (sea level rise,
emission pathways, scenario development, climate simulations
retreat of glaciers, surface temperature increase), Linkages between
of the future; Socio-economic impacts, quantifying uncertainties,
global warming and climate change, Observed climate change over
tipping points and irreversible changes; Observed and projected
the monsoon region, Assessing changing monsoon using models and
changes in weather, monsoons, teleconnections, extreme weather
observations, climate change and global warming implications for the
events, sea level in India; Climate hot spots, sector wise vulnerability
future of monsoon, Challenges involved in forecasting the monsoon
and adaptation; Reducing greenhouse gas emissions, clean energy
and its variability. Future directions in monsoon research.
technologies, geoengineering options.
ASL375 Climate of the past: Lessons for the future
ASL340 Fundamentals of Weather and Climate
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Framework of climate science, Earth's climate system today, climate
Composition of atmosphere, observations, Equations of state;
archives, CO2, plate tectonics and long-term climate, Greenhouse to
Solar radiation and seasons, energy balance and temperature;
lcehouse climates, astronomical control of solar radiation, lnsolation
Thermodynamic state of atmosphere, Clouds and precipitation
control of monsoon and ice sheets, orbital-scale interactions,
processes; Fundamental forces in the atmosphere and ocean:
feedbacks and unsolved mysteries in long term climate change. The
Pressure gradient, gravitational, Coriolis and frictional forces,
last glacial maximum, climate during and since the last deglaciation;
Atmospheric chemistry: gas phase chemical reactions, tropospheric
Holocene climate optimum and beginning of ancient civilizations;
and stratospheric chemistry, thermodynamic diagrams, General
Impact of climate change on ancient civilizations; humans and pre-
circulation in the atmosphere, small and large weather systems;
industrial climate, climate changes during the last millennium; climate
weather maps, science of weather forecasting, measures of
change since 1850 from observational records, causes of warming
forecasting using skill scores; air-sea interaction and its role on
over the last 125 years, future climate change.
weather and climate; Climate and controlling factors, The Koeppen
system, tropical climate. ASL380 Climate Modeling
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ASL350 Introduction to Oceanography
Basics of the climate system and introduction to climate modeling.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Conservation of mass, momentum, and energy; horizontal and vertical
The course begins with a description of structure, formation, and
energy transfer, moist processes, and wave processes.
evolution of ocean basins which extends to important features of
Numerical Modeling (Model overview, initial and boundary conditions,
each ocean basin. The physical, chemical, and biological properties of
numerical techniques, parameterization of sub-grid scale processes,
seawater and their distribution are covered next. Optical and acoustic
hierarchy of models, simulation, tuning, validation, and verification)
properties of the sea and their applications are covered; Relations
Case studies (Phenomenological and process studies, viz. influence of
of ocean currents and waves with the driving forces, Effect of ocean
mountains and surface temperature on atmospheric circulation and
basins on oceanic motions; Properties of wind waves, internal waves,
precipitation distributions, etc.; modeling of climate change due to
Tsunamis, and Tides; Mechanisms of transport of energy, momentum,
and physical substances within and across ocean basins; Coastal
doubling of CO2, etc.)
ocean processes and transport of sediments; Biological productivity
ASL385 Fundamentals of Air pollution Science
of oceans and marine organisms, Marine pollution and oil spill; Topics
3 Credits (3-0-0)
of current interest such as ocean’s role in climate, global warming,
sea-level rise, storm surge and Tsunami warning, fisheries, and Basics of air pollution science; fundamentals of the atmosphere:
renewable energy from oceans are presented. structure, composition, transport, and stability; PM2.5 pollution;
surface ozone; acid rain; mercury and persistent organic pollutants; in
ASL360 The Earth’s Atmosphere: physical principles situ measurements; emerging techniques in satellite remote sensing of
3 Credits (3-0-0) surface air quality; concepts behind modeling air pollutant transport:
one-box model, puff models, and continuity equation: Eulerian and
This course is on the physical principles of the Earth’s atmosphere.
Lagrangian forms; air pollution hotspots and emerging issues over the
The course will begin with the forces and energy governing the
Indo-Gangetic Plain, Delhi and other Asian megacities; crop residue
atmospheric flows and regulating the weather and climate of the
burning, forest fire emissions, and desert dust; impact of emission
planet. Physical processes such as atmospheric convection will be
reduction policies and natural events on global, regional, and local air
discussed in great detail. How the atmospheric flows transport mass,
quality; inter-relation of air pollution and climate change; impacts of
momentum, and energy in space will be described. The general
air pollution on human health and food security; clean air technologies.
features of the today’s atmosphere will be explained. Emphases will
be given on the need and art of atmospheric modeling and future
ASD390 Minor Area project
projection of the atmosphere for the next century. The course is
5 Credits (0-0-10)
very conceptual in nature with a strong research flavour, and will
introduce undergraduate students to the art of research in context Theoretical, applied and design problems in atmospheric and
of the subject. oceanic sciences will be explored by the student and discussed with
the faculty. The problem will be defined and student will carry out
ASL370 Indian Monsoon, Global Warming, and Climate relevant literature survey. The student will collect the required data,
Change do the analysis and produce results during entire semester. Progress
3 Credits (3-0-0) of student will be evaluated through student seminar and report.
Introduction to Monsoon, Monsoon systems across the globe (Indian ASL730 Introduction to Weather, Climate and Air
Monsoon, East Asian monsoon, West African monsoon, South and
pollution (Not allowed for : Any program other than
North American monsoon), Physical principles that are driving
AST and ASZ)
the Indian monsoon system, Atmospheric circulation or dynamics
associated with the Indian monsoon system, How teleconnections 1 Credit (1-0-0)
(climate variability in other parts of the world such as PDO, ENSO, etc.) Overview of the discipline, history and landmarks, career options,
could possibly influence the Indian monsoon system, Introduction weather vs climate, online resources; composition of the atmosphere,
322

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Atmospheric Sciences
Greenhouse Effect, Ozone Hole, vertical structure of the atmosphere length hypothesis; Ekman layer; Acoustic, gravity, Poincare, Rossby
and oceans; energy in the atmosphere, mechanisms of radiative and Kelvin waves. Atmospheric general circulation.
transfer; water in the atmosphere, origin and types of clouds
and precipitation; atmospheric and oceanic motion, forces, major ASL735 Atmospheric Chemistry and Air pollution
wind patterns and ocean currents, monsoons, local circulations, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
scales of motion; climate and climate change, IPCC; air pollution, Atmospheric Composition and air pollutants, Geochemical cycles:
pollutants, acid rain, plumes, effects of wind and stability, episodes; Evolution of the atmosphere and geochemical cycling of elements;
observation tools including AWS, radar, satellite; weather and climate Atmospheric photochemistry; Chemistry of the troposphere: Basic
models, NWP, chaos theory; field trip to IMD and Hindon AFB to see photochemical cycle, atmospheric chemistry dealing with various
meteorological instruments in operation. pollutant species and photochemical smog; Oxidising power of the
troposphere and the Hydroxyl radical, global budgets of precursor
ASp731 Data Analysis Methods for Atmospheric and
species; Stratospheric Chemistry and Ozone: Overview, Chapman
Oceanic Sciences (Not allowed for : Any program other
mechanism, reservoir species and catalytic cycles, Ozone hole
than AST and ASZ) and polar stratospheric clouds, Arctic Ozone loss, Ozone depletion
2 Credits (0-0-4) potential; Aqueous phase atmospheric chemistry and acid rain;
Introduction to UNIX/LINUX, basic commands, file management; Atmospheric Aerosols: sources and characteristics, radiative effects
introduction to MATLAB, using Mathworks resources; MATLAB I/O and perturbation to climate; Atmospheric air pollutants: sources,
with NetCDF, HDF and GRIB2; plotting 1, 2 and 3 dimensional impacts and standards; Air Pollution Meteorology: sources of air
weather/climate data and animations with MATLAB; Univariate & pollutants, classification and air quality standards, stability conditions,
bivariate statistics, mean/median/mode, variance/standard deviation, wind velocity profile, turbulence, mixing depth, characteristics of
correlation, errors, regression; probability and distributions, how to stack plumes; Dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere: A Gaussian
frame and test a hypothesis, principles of statistical significance, dispersion model, dispersion parameters and effective stack height.
using MATLAB functions to test hypotheses and estimate statistical
significance; working with spatial weather/climate data, regridding ASL736 Science of Climate Change
meteorological station data, interpolation, map overlays; working 3 Credits (3-0-0)
with time-series, interpolation, estimating trend in weather/climate Description of the climate system (General circulation, hydrological
variables. cycle, carbon cycle). Natural greenhouse effect and the effect of trace
gases and aerosols. Forcings (natural & anthropogenic), Fast and
ASL732 Mathematical and Computational Methods for Slow Feedbacks, Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity, Transient Climate
Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences (Not allowed for : Response. Climates of the past (ice ages, proxy records, abrupt
Any program other than AST and ASZ) climate change, instrumental record of climate). Climate variability and
3 Credits (2-0-2) time-scales; MJO, ENSO, PDO, Milankovic cycles. Modeling climate:
Simple EBMs, Coupled Climate Models. Natural and Anthropogenic
Elements of FORTRAN programming; Initial and boundary value
climate change. Future climate projections.
problems; second order ordinary differential equations, variation
of parameters, orthogonal functions; Partial differential equations
ASL737 physical and Dynamical Oceanography
and their classification, method of separation of variables; Euler and
RungeKutta methods for ODE; Spatial and temporal finite differencing 3 Credits (3-0-0)
schemes of various orders, comparison with exact solutions, accuracy Properties of sea water; temperature and salinity distributions;
and numerical stability, limitation of finite difference methods; stratification and stability of oceanic water column; equation of state
Numerical solution of linear advection equation, advection-diffusion of sea water; oceanic mixed layer processes; governing equations
equation, and shallow water equation. for oceanic motions; inertial and geostrophic currents; wind-driven
circulation; thermohaline circulation; Barotropic and baroclinic
ASL733 physics of the Atmosphere transports; western boundary intensification; gyres and meso-scale
3 Credits (3-0-0) eddies; gyre systems, major currents in world oceans; Indian ocean
circulation; physics and dynamics of ocean wind waves, internal waves
Structure of the atmosphere; Hydrostatic equilibrium, Geopotential,
and tides; coastal ocean processes; upwelling and downwelling in
Hypsometric equation and scale height, Altimetry; Adiabatic
coastal and equatorial oceans; Rossby and Kelvin waves, biological
processes, Lapse rates, Static stability, dynamic stability; Atmospheric
productivity of oceans; heat and salt budget of oceans; observational
Boundary Layer Structure and evolution, turbulence etc.
methods in oceans; storm surges, ENSO and IOD phenomenon.
Atmospheric Thermodynamics: Thermodynamic laws; Thermodynamics
of water vapour and moist air: Moisture parameters, Saturated ASL738 Numerical Modeling of the Atmosphere and
adiabatic and Pseudoadiabatic processes, Conditional and convective
Ocean (Not allowed for : Any program other than AST
instability, Free and forced convection; Thermodynamic diagrams;
and ASZ)
Phase change and Clausius-Clapeyron equation; Clouds: Formation
and classification, Precipitation; Atmospheric visibility: Dew, Frost 3 Credits (2-0-2)
and fog, smog etc. Introduction to weather and climate models, Numerical Modeling Vs.
The fundamental physics of radiation: solar and terrestrial Other Modeling Approaches, Examples of atmospheric and oceanic
radiation, radiation laws; absorption, emission and scattering in simulations, Model Hierarchy (Simple, Intermediate, Complex);
the atmosphere, Schwarzchild’s equation; Radiation in the earth- Governing equations in Cartesian, Isobaric and sigma coordinate
atmosphere system: Geographical and seasonal distribution, systems; Numerical discretization (finite difference, finite volume,
Radiative heating and cooling of the atmosphere, Surface energy spectral) and integration, stability, CFL criterion, unconditionally stable
budget, The mean annual heat balance. numerical scheme; model components, dynamical core, physical
parameterization, tracers, coupling of components; global and
ASL734 Dynamics of the Atmosphere regional models used in weather forecasting and climate simulations.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ASL750 Boundary Layer Meteorology
Fundamental forces; basic laws of conservation; hydrodynamic
equations in rotating frame of reference; dimensional analysis; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
geostrophic and hydrostatic approximations; Atmospheric stability; Introduction to the boundary layer, definition and qualitative
Isobaric coordinate system; Gradient wind approximation; thermal description of temporal evolution and vertical structure; Fourier series
wind; vertical motion; barotropic and baroclinic atmospheres; and turbulence spectra, Reynold’s averaging, interpreting variance/
Circulation and vorticity; vorticity equation; potential vorticity covariance as turbulent kinetic energy and fluxes, tensors and Einstein
conservation. Boussinesq approximation; Reynolds averaging; mixing summation notation; Prognostic equations for mean variables in a
323

Atmospheric Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
turbulent flow, simplifications; Prognostic equations for turbulent impact of microphysical processes on dynamics; cloud chemistry;
fluxes and variances; TKE equation, static and dynamic instability, aerosol-cloud interaction: direct, indirect and semi-direct effects;
Reynold’s number, Richardson number, Obukhov length, stability clouds in numerical models: parameterization of cloud microphysics;
parameter relationships, closure problem in turbulent flow, first-order cloud-climate interaction.
local closure; surface boundary conditions, surface momentum,
energy and moisture budgets, fluxes at surface and entrainment ASL755 Remote Sensing of the Atmosphere and Ocean
zone, drag and Bowen ratio methods; surface layer Similarity 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Theory, Buckingham Pi method, applications to wind profiles; Stable
Basics of satellite remote sensing: satellite orbits, sensor
and convective mixed layer phenomena including nocturnal jets,
characteristics, view angle, passive and active remote sensing;
thermals, dust devils; boundary layer clouds, fair-weather cumulus,
atmospheric radiative transfer application in retrievals of geophysical
fog; geographically generated local circulations like slope and valley
parameters; aerosol remote sensing using ground-based (passive
winds, sea/lake breeze, geographically modified flow, fetch, internal
radiometer and lidar) and satellite platforms, retrieval algorithm,
boundary layer.
vertical distribution, application of aerosol products in climate studies;
cloud remote sensing, cloud detection using multi-spectral technique,
ASL751 Dispersion of Air pollutants
issues in cloud-masking, CO2 slice technique; trace gas retrievals;
3 Credits (3-0-0) ocean colour remote sensing, SST retrieval, wind scatterometry,
Air Pollution, Various types, sources and effects of pollutants in altimetry; microwave remote sensing: soil moisture retrieval, passive
the atmospheric environment; Particulate matter and atmospheric (brightness temperature) and active (radar) microwave remote
visibility; Atmospheric diffusion theories and types of dispersion sensing for precipitation, sounding, remote sensing of cryosphere;
models; Lapse rates and various types of stability classification, satellite meteorology for extreme weather events (e.g. cyclone,
Wind-profile ,Wind rose, Mixing Depth, General characteristics of thunderstorms etc.); land-use/land-cover change; hydrological
the stack plumes; Dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere and application using gravity anomaly from satellites.
solution of advection diffusion equation with Gaussian distribution for
point, line and area sources, plume rise, dispersion parameters and ASL756 Synoptic Meteorology
various methods of their evaluation; Atmospheric Removal processes 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and residence time; Effect of buildings and topography on dispersion;
Different scales of atmospheric motion; Different types of air
Similarity theory and profiles in the surface layer; Air Quality and
masses and tropical weather systems; Western disturbances and
Emission standards, their measurements and statistics; Introduction
monsoonal cyclonic systems, Meteorological charts and diagrams, map
of air quality models for regulatory applications.
projections, plotting of synoptic maps; Analysis of sea level pressure
patterns, pressure tendency, surface temperature and dew point,
ASL752 Mesoscale Meteorology stream lines and wind pattern, temperature patterns and isotach;
3 Credits (3-0-0) Analysis of the vertical structure of the atmosphere.
Overview of mesoscale phenomena relevant to India including
tornadoes, thunderstorms, cloud bursts, fog, extreme rain events, ASL757 Tropical Weather and Climate
lightning, etc; Circulation systems related to orography, mountain 3 Credits (3-0-0)
drag, mountain waves, valley winds, valley air pollution; Adiabatic Overview; Structure of the tropical atmosphere; Role of the Tropics
mesoscale perturbations in a straight atmospheric flow; Theory of in the Global Mass, Momentum, and Energy Balance; Tropical
linear gravity waves, orographic gravity-wave drag; Parameterization Circulation & Mean Precipitation Distribution; ITCZ (Inter-tropical
of mesoscale phenomena in general circulation models; Mesoscale Convergence Zone); Tropical Waves and Tropical Variability (Intra-
models and their application in India. seasonal: MJO (Madden-Julian Oscillation), CCEWs (Convectively
Coupled Equatorial Waves), Inter-annual: ENSO (El Niño Southern
ASL753 Atmospheric Aerosols Oscillation), QBO (Quasi-biennial oscillation), Decadal: PDO (Pacific
3 Credits (3-0-0) Decadal Oscillation), AMO (Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscillation), NAO
(North Atlantic Oscillation)); Monsoons (Mean and variability); Tropical
Introduction to atmospheric aerosols; Characterization of Aerosols;
Cyclones; Modeling of the Tropical Climate & Weather.
Physical and Optical properties of aerosols, size distribution,
refractive indices of aerosols, absorption and scattering of radiation
ASL758 General Circulation of the Atmosphere
by aerosols; single scattering albedo, aerosol optical depth, aerosol
phase function, hygroscopic growth; mixing state, vertical distribution 3 Credits (3-0-0)
in the atmosphere; Aerosol Chemical Composition; mixing state of General Principles of Atmospheric Motion (Simplifications of Force
aerosols; New particle formation; volatile chemical compounds and Balances Important to Large-scale Motions, Large-scale Structures
gas-to-particle conversion processes; Observations and Measurements in the Atmosphere , Simplifications for Large-scale Vertical Structure,
of aerosols; Climatology of Tropospheric Aerosols; Stratospheric Scale Analysis of the Tropics), General Circulation of the Atmosphere
aerosols; Dynamics of single aerosol particle and aerosol population; (Historical Evolution of Global Circulation Conceptual Models,
Transport and transformation of aerosols; Removal of aerosols; Axisymmetric Hadley Cell: Theories and Assumptions, A Road Map
Thermodynamics of aerosols; Role in Nucleation; Role in Cloud to the Tropics and Subtropics, Walker circulation, Comparing the
Physics; Interaction of aerosols with radiation; Direct, indirect, Tropics and Midlatitudes, Stratospheric Circulations), Surface ocean
and semi-direct effects of aerosols and their influence on Climate; circulation, Atmospheric response to Equatorial Heating, Monsoons
Aerosol effects on human health and air quality; Aerosols in chemistry (Defining the Monsoon, A Conceptual Model of Monsoon Evolution,
transport models; Aerosols in climate models; Latest trends in aerosol Evolution of the South Asian Monsoon System, Other Monsoons
research and future directions. Around the World, Australian-Maritime Continent Monsoon, West
African Monsoon, Monsoons in the Americas), General Circulation
ASL754 Cloud physics Modeling (Basics of an atmospheric general circulation model,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Representation of physical processes in GCMs, analysis of GCM
simulations and comparison with observations, challenges for
Cloud types; cloud formation; cloud dynamics: entrainment,
improving GCM simulations).
detrainment and downdraft initiation in cumuli, large scale
convergence, mesoscale convective system; Kohler theory; CCN
ASL759 Land-Atmosphere Interactions
and IN; homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation; fundamental
equations governing cloud processes; warm cloud microphysics: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
diffusional growth, droplet population, collision-coalescence, radiative Introduction: components of the Earth System, energy, hydrologic
cooling; ice cloud microphysics: nucleation, ice multiplication, growth and biogeochemical cycles; Weather and climate processes including
of ice particles by accretion and ice particle melting; hydrometeor; atmospheric boundary layer, convection, clouds and precipitation,
324

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Atmospheric Sciences
surface energy and moisture fluxes, climate, climate variability; trapped long waves, influence of sea-bed friction, Wave spectra,
Canopy-air interactions: canopy processes, observations, big Refraction and shoaling of waves, Seiches, waves-current interaction,
leaf models, canopy models; Terrestrial hydrology: watershed wave transformation in shallow waters, Tsunamis, Breaking waves,
hydrology, river routing models; Soil: soil physics, soil moisture, Phenomenon of wave reflection, refraction, and diffraction, Surf zone
soil biogeochemistry, soil models; Carbon cycle: photosynthesis, hydrodynamics, shoreline setup, Swash and runup heights, wave
vegetation dynamics, global biogeography, carbon cycle models; generated alongshore currents, Rip currents, Storm surges, theory
Terrestrial forcings: landscape heterogeneity, landscape induced and of tides, Tides in rivers and coastal lagoons, General characteristics
modified flow, feedbacks, land models, coupled Earth System models; of estuaries, Classification of estuaries, stratification, estuarine
Land-use/land-cover change: Deforestation, agriculture, urbanization, circulation and mixing, Shear instability at an interface, Entrainment
forest fires, effects on weather and climate. and sedimentation in estuaries, Dispersion processes: Advective
and turbulent diffusion, River-estuary-near-shore systems, Sediment
ASL760 Renewable Energy Meteorology characteristics, Sediment transport mechanisms: bedform dynamics,
suspended particles in wave flows and vortices, Morpho-dynamics:
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Beach profiles, Tide range influence on beach morphology, Lee side
Introduction to the atmosphere: weather and climate processes; Solar
erosion, Beach realignment due to climate change, Interaction of an
radiation and surface energy balance: Solar constant, solar geometry,
estuary with the near-shore bay.
atmospheric radiative transfer, clouds and aerosols, surface energy
budget, urban energy use, sensors and observations; Meteorological
ASL765 Impacts of Climate Change and Air pollution
considerations for solar power: solar resource assessment, solar
forecasting for different timescales, uncertainty estimation, types of on Human Health
solar systems; Wind in the atmospheric boundary layer: boundary 3 Credits (3-0-0)
layer structure and evolution, surface layer, stability, log and power
Pre-requisite(s): Either ASL320 or ASL340 for UG Students;
laws, flow over complex terrain, low-level jets, offshore winds, sensors
None for PG students
and observations; Meteorological considerations for wind power: wind
resource assessment, wind forecasting for different timescales using Fundamentals of climate change and weather extremes. Interpretation
statistical and numerical methods, uncertainty estimation, types of of climate change and weather extreme in the context of human
turbines, turbine wakes, wake interactions in wind farms, turbine and exposure. Geohealth. Environmental health pathway. Exposure,
wake models, LES and mesoscale models of wind farms; Solar-wind dose, and risk assessment. Health burden indicators. Heat stress.
coupling: resource variability, power demand, optimization. Environmental conditions for transmission of water and vector-borne
diseases. Air pollution epidemiology. Confounders in health burden
ASL761 Earth System Modeling estimates. Health impact assessment tools. Impacts of climate change
and air pollution on mental health. Ozone layer, UV radiation and
3 Credits (3-0-0)
health impacts. Food security and malnutrition. Disease forecasting.
Basics of Earth System Science (Earth system components, Physical Climate-health co-benefits. Climate-resilient health infrastructure.
phenomena in the Earth system, Globally averaged energy budget, Health early-warning system.
Energy transports by atmosphere and ocean, concepts of radiative
forcing, feedbacks and climate change), Physical Processes in the
ASp766 Atmospheric Measurements and Analysis
Earth System and governing principles (Equation of state, Continuity
Hands-on
equation, Conservation of momentum, Temperature equation,
Moisture equation and salinity equation, Moist processes, Wave 3 Credits (1-0-4)
processes in the atmosphere and ocean), Representation of Physical Fundamental principles and techniques used in atmospheric
processes in Earth System Models (Treatment of sub-grid scale measurements of aerosols, trace gases, greenhouse gases,
processes such as dry convection, moist convection, land surface, meteorological parameters, and noise pollution. Setting-up,
snow, ice and vegetation; Radiation, greenhouse gases, aerosols and loperating, maintaining, analysing, and interpreting datasets from
other climate forcings), Biogeochemical and Biophysical Processes, low-cost sensors to state-of-art atmospheric instrumentation. Carrying
coupling between physics packages, Dynamics in Earth System Models out hands-on project work which will cover scientific and technical
(Dynamical core, Grid scale processes, Numerical representation of aspects of atmospheric measurements and train the students to do
the grid scale processes, Grids, Resolution, Accuracy, Efficiency, and high quality atmospheric measurements that will directly feed into
Scalability), Earth system model simulations (Climate simulations their own research projects and interests.
and climate drift, Verification and Validation of simulations with
observations, Emission Scenarios & forcings, Global-average response
ASS800 Independent Study
to greenhouse warming scenarios, Transient climate change versus
3 Credits (0-3-0)
equilibrium response experiments, Trends & natural variability,
scale dependency of simulations, Multi-model simulations & To be given by the interested faculty.
ensemble averages, Simulation examples from Coupled Model Inter-
comparison Project). ASp820 Advanced Data Analysis for Weather and
Climate (Not allowed for : Any program other than
ASL762 Air-Sea Interaction AST and ASZ)
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (1-0-4)
State of matter near the air-sea interface, marine boundary layer, Weather Forecast Evaluation: Jet stream analysis, standard diagnostics
transfer properties between atmosphere and ocean, solar and and skill scores, Extreme events analysis. Using correlation to explore
terrestrial radiation, sea surface radiation budget, surface wind waves, the relationships between large-scale atmospheric conditions, and
air-sea interaction processes using examples of ENSO, hurricane, local weather. Analyzing trends in climate data, and determining if
Indian monsoon, turbulent transfer near the interface, bubbles and they are statistically significant (regression, Mann-Kendall test etc).
spray, transport of trace gases across the interface; latent, sensible, Regression based approaches, simple linear & multiple. Using indexes,
and momentum fluxes in the surface boundary layer over the sea, Compositing patterns, Isolating patterns using EOF/PC analysis;
bulk parameterizations, large-scale forcing by sea surface buoyancy Analysis of Time Series, Autocorrelation and Spectra.
fluxes, spatio-temporal variability of ocean surface fluxes with
reference to Indian ocean.
ASL821 Advanced Dynamic Meteorology
ASL763 Coastal Ocean and Estuarine processes 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): ASL734
Wave generating and restoring forces, shallow water waves, coastally Quasi-geostrophic motions in the atmosphere: circulation and vorticity;
325

Atmospheric Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
Ertel-Rossby invariants; Ertel’s potential vorticity conservation ASp825 Mesoscale Modeling (Not allowed for : Any
theorem; Kelvin and Bjerknesbaroclinic circulation theorem; quasi- program other than AST and ASZ)
geostrophic turbulence. Instabilities in the atmosphere: barotropic
3 Credits (0-0-6)
and baroclinic instability; symmetric instabilities. Quasi-geostrophic
Introduction to the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model
motions in equatorial region, heat-induced tropical circulations:
and parallel computing; Install WRF, NCL and associated libraries;
monsoons, El Nino and Madden-Julian Oscillation. Waves in the
Conduct test simulations for 2-d idealized cases such as flow over
atmosphere: Kelvin, Rossby and Poincaré waves, Lamb wave, internal
a hill, sea-breeze, etc., configure and conduct test simulations for a
gravity waves, vertically propagating waves, Rossby adjustment
full 3-d real case, conduct numerical experiments by changing initial
theory. Middle atmosphere dynamics: sudden atmospheric warming,
& boundary conditions and namelist parameters/flags; Understand
QBO. General circulation of the atmosphere: analysis of surface
WRF code structure and registry by adding new variables into
pressure and associated wind circulation, upper-tropospheric
different modules; Introduction to parameterizations in WRF,
(200hPa) circulation; scale analysis, formulation of the governing
explore the science and the codes of a land surface scheme and a
set of equations for a weather prediction model.
cumulus scheme, make simple modifications to the schemes, conduct
numerical experiments with modified schemes.
ASL822 Climate Variability
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Major modes or patterns of climate variability on intraseasonal to ASL826 Ocean Modeling (Not allowed for : Any program
interannual and decadal time scales. Well-known modes including other than AST and ASZ)
Madden-Julian Oscillation, El Nino-Southern Oscillation, Pacific 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Decadal Oscillation, Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation, Indian Ocean
Introduction to ocean dynamics, governing equations of oceanic
Dipole, Monsoon, North Atlantic Oscillation, and Annular Modes (Arctic
motions, numerical methods in ocean modelling, hydrostatic and
and Antarctic Oscillation) and their impacts on extreme weather and
non-hydrostatic phenomenon, barotropic and baroclinic processes,
climate. The course will review climate mode/pattern dynamics, their
lateral and open boundary conditions, parameterization of sub-grid
teleconnection mechanisms and impacts on weather/climate such as
scale processes, large scale ocean circulation, modelling of shelf
droughts etc. Temporal behavior –including how these modes have
circulation, tides and storm surge modelling, regional and coastal
changed in the past, and how anthropogenic climate change may
ocean models, shallow water models, multi-level basin scale and
affect future mode behavior). Discussion of predictability of climate
global ocean models, ocean wave modelling, introduction to data
modes/patterns on seasonal to interannual time scales. Detection
assimilation techniques.
and attribution of climate change.
ASL823 Geophysical Fluid Dynamics ASL827 Advanced Dynamic Oceanography
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
(i) Fundamental concepts in geophysical fluid dynamics: equations
Pre-requisite(s): Either ASL734 or ASL737
of motion on a rotating planet, vorticity and circulation, conservation
Conservation laws for moving fluids, Ekman and Sverdrup theories,
of potential vorticity, thermal wind, Taylor-Proudman theorem;
coastal upwelling and fronts, Western boundary intensification,
Ertel-Rossby invariants; Ertel’s potential vorticity conservation
barotropic currents, baroclinic transport over topography, thermohaline
theorem; consequences of geostrophic and hydrostatic approximation.
circulation, Mesoscale eddies and variability. Indian ocean circulation,
(ii) Shallow-water theory: derivation of shallow-water equations;
wave theory, ocean wave spectra, wave energy equation, breaking
derivation of vorticity equation; linearized form of shallow-water
waves, reflection and dissipation, theory of tides, tidal currents, tidal
equations; plane waves in a layer of constant depth; dispersion
processes in embayment and estuaries, wind and buoyancy driven
diagrams of Kelvin and Poincaré waves. (iii) Rossby wave theory:
currents, near-shore circulation, alongshore currents, wave-current
mechanism of Rossby wave generation; inertial boundary currents;
interaction, sediment transport, coastal ocean response to extreme
derivation of potential vorticity on beta-plane; quasigeostrophic
wind forcing, storm surges, Planetary and equatorial waves, coastally
scaling; Rossby waves in a zonal current; method of multiple scales
trapped Kelvin waves.
for linear potential vorticity equation; reflection and radiation of
Rossby waves; generation of Rossby waves by an initial disturbance;
Quasigeostrophic normal modes in a closed basin; resonant
ASL851 Special Topics in Climate
interaction; energy and enstrophy conservation; upscale energy
3 Credits (3-0-0)
transfer. (iv) Friction effects in geophysical flows: Turbulent Reynolds
stresses; Ekman layers in a homogeneous, incompressible rotating To be given by the interested faculty.
fluid; Ekman layer on a sloping surface; quasigeostrophic potential
vorticity with friction and topography. (v) Instability theory: linear
stability; normal modes; growth rates; baroclinic instability; Eady ASL852 Special Topics in Oceans
model and Charney model; instability in a two-layer model. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
To be given by the interested faculty.
ASL824 parameterization of physical processes
3 Credits (3-0-0)
ASL853 Special Topics in Atmosphere
Pre-requisite(s): Any one of ASL733, ASL734
3 Credits (3-0-0)
A simple model of atmosphere with Rayleigh friction and Newtonian
To be given by the interested faculty.
cooling: Gill’s analytical solutions for heat-induced tropical circulations
(especially El Niño and monsoon circulation); horizontal diffusion in
NWP models: prevention of accumulation of small scale noise, inverse
ASL854 Special Topics in Air pollution Studies
cascade. Aerodynamic formulae for surface turbulent fluxes, vertical
3 Credits (3-0-0)
turbulent diffusion: one-dimensional PBL model. Parameterization
of orographic drag. Dry and moist processes in the atmosphere: To be given by the interested faculty.
a simple model of convection, dry adiabatic adjustment, large-
scale condensation, and parameterization of deep and shallow
ASp855 Special Topics in Atmosphere and Ocean (Not
convection. Simple and complex radiative transfer in the atmosphere;
allowed for : Any program other than AST and ASZ)
absorption of radiation by ozone, carbon dioxide and water vapour;
shortwave and longwave radiation computation; radiative heating in 3 Credits (1-0-4)
the atmosphere. To be given by the interested faculty.
326

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Atmospheric Sciences
ASL856 Special Topics in Atmospheric and Oceanic ASp868 Special Module in Atmospheric and Oceanic
Observations (Not allowed for : Any program other Observations (Not allowed for : Any program other
than AST and ASZ) than AST and ASZ)
3 Credits (2-0-2) 1 Credit (0-0-2)
To be given by the interested faculty. To be given by the interested faculty.
ASC869 Atmospheric and Oceanic Science Colloquium
ASV862 Special Module in Climate (Not allowed for : Any program other than AST and ASZ)
1 Credit (1-0-0) 1 Credit (0-1-0)
To be given by the interested faculty. To be given by the interested faculty.
ASD881 project-I (Not allowed for : Any program other
ASV863 Special Module in Oceans than AST and ASZ)
1 Credit (1-0-0) 6 Credits (0-0-12)
To be given by the interested faculty. To be given by the interested faculty.
ASD882 project-II (Not allowed for : Any program other
ASV864 Special Module in Atmosphere than AST and ASZ)
1 Credit (1-0-0) 12 Credits (0-0-24)
To be given by the interested faculty. Pre-requisite(s): ASD881
ASV892 An Introduction to Renewable Energy
ASV865 Special Module in Air pollution Studies Meteorology
1 Credit (1-0-0) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
To be given by the interested faculty. Overlaps with: ASL760
Fundamentals of weather, climate, and air pollution: forces, scales
of atmospheric motion Atmospheric Boundary Layer: Turbulence,
ASV866 Special Module in Atmosphere and Ocean stability, log and power law profiles of wind over land and oceans,
1 Credit (1-0-0) nocturnal low-level jet; Atmospheric radiative transfer: Solar
To be given by the interested faculty. irradiance, clouds, aerosols, dust storms; Introduction to Atmospheric
Models: Modeling approaches-numerical models, empirical models,
wake and wind farm models, solar PV models, Atmospheric data:
Accuracy vs precision, station surface and tower observations,
ASp867 Special Module in Weather Forecasting (Not
reanalysis data, satellite data, public domain data repositories;
allowed for : Any program other than AST and ASZ)
Resource assessment and Forecasting: Fundamentals, Feedbacks in
1 Credit (0-0-2) resource assessment, forecast time scales, chaos theory, uncertainty,
To be given by the interested faculty. and predictability.
327

Centre for Automotive Research and Tribology
CTp702 Electric Vehicle Laboratory I CTL704 Electrical Engineering for EV Technology
3 credits (1 0 4) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Charging infrastructure and notion of battery swapping; Charging Fundamental operating principles of power electronic circuits, Design
interfaces; Battery testing; Single cell performance; charge-discharge of Magnetic Circuits and transformers, Power Electronic Devices
tests; capacity retention test; electrochemical testing; EIS; etc. {Power Diodes, Power Transistors, Power MOSFETs, Insulated
Battery management system (BMS) testing; Over protection; Over Gate Bipolar Transistors), Linear Voltage Regulator, Controlled and
current; Short circuit tests; Over voltage tests; Module design and Uncontrolled Rectifier Circuits, DC/DC Converters (Buck, Boost,
testing; electromechanical assembly of cells; welding of cells; BMS Buck-Boost, Forward, Flyback and Push-pull converter), Gate Driving
design and integration in Module; Power train architecture. DC-DC Techniques, DC/AC Converters, PWM Techniques (Sine-triangle PWM,
converters; Isolated gate driving techniques; Winding diagram and Space-Vector PWM, Third Harmonic Injected PWM), Fundamentals of
development of induction machine; PWM techniques; Charge balancing Electric Drives, DC Motor Drives, Induction Motor Drives, Synchronous
circuits; Power train testing; Converter testing; Control of drives. Motor Drives, Simulation of Power Electronic Converter circuits,
Controller algorithm implementation of AC motors.
ITL702 Diagnostic Maintenance and Condition Monitoring
CTL705 Engineering of Electric Vehicles
4 Credits (3-0-2)
3 credits (3 0 0)
Maintenance strategies and introduction to Condition Based
Maintenance (CBM), Application and economic benefits, Signature Introduction to types and working mechanisms of Electric Vehicles,
analysis - online and off-line techniques, Various Condition Monitoring Components of Electric Vehicles, Chassis /Battery/Charger/etc.,
(CM) techniques - Vibration monitoring and analysis, Shock Pulse Standard Materials and its properties for components used in Electric
Method, Noise monitoring, Envelope detection technique, Cepstrum Vehicles, Frame and Chassis of Electric Vehicles, Battery components
analysis, Oil analysis including wear debris and contaminant and its design parameters, battery manufacturing methods,
monitoring, Performance monitoring, Acoustic emission and other applications and operation of batteries in Electric Vehicles, braking
techniques, Non-destructive testing techniques, Temperature systems in EVs, planetary gears, clutches, differentials, all-wheel
monitoring including Thermography, Application and choice of the drive regenerative braking mechanisms, Brake strategies (Series and
method, Practical applications of diagnostic maintenance, Condition Parallel), Braking torque distribution principle, electro-mechanical
monitoring of mechanical and electrical machines, Case studies. hybrid braking system, Braking force mathematical model.
CTL703 Introduction to Electric Vehicles ITL705 Materials for Tribological Applications
3 credits (3 0 0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction to HEV, PHEV, and EV Powertrain, Fuel cell vehicles; Introduction to tribological processes and tribological relevant
comparison between ICE and EV- operating principles, emission properties of materials. An overview of engineering materials having
control; Overview of Indian and international regulatory requirements potential for tribological application.
for EV - AIS-048 BOV (battery operated vehicle); Fundamentals of Characterization and evaluation of Ferrous materials for tribological
Vehicle Propulsion; Electric Propulsion System - drives; Hybrid Electric requirements/applications, Selection of ferrous materials for rolling
Vehicles – series, parallel hybrid power trains; Energy Storage for element bearings, gears, crank shafts, piston rings, cylinder liners, etc.
EVs – Battery, Ultracapacitors, Fuel cells; Battery Management System Non-ferrous materials and their applications such as sliding bearings,
(BMS); Chargers and charging infrastructures, Battery swapping piston rings, cylinder liners, etc., materials for dry friction materials.
stations, Controllers, sensors and communication protocols; EV Composite materials (PM, CMC and MMC) for tribological applications.
Telematics; Fundamentals of Regenerative Braking; Modelling and Surface treatment techniques with applications such as carburizing,
simulation of EVs; Design examples for HEV, EVs. nitriding, induction hardening, hard facing, laser surface treatments, etc.
Surface coating techniques such as electrochemical depositions,
ITL703 Fundamentals of Tribology anodizing, thermal spraying, Chemical Vapour Deposition (CVD),
4 Credits (3-0-2) Physical Vapour Deposition (PVD), etc. and their applications.
Introduction to tribology and its historical background. Factors Lubricants- Introduction, requirements, types, Evaluation and testing
influencing Tribological phenomena. Engineering surfaces – Surface of lubricants.
characterization, Computation of surface parameters. Surface
measurement techniques. Apparent and real area of contact. CTL707 Batteries for Electric Vehicles: Multidisciplinary
Contact of engineering surfaces- Hertzian and non-hertzian contact. perspectives
Contact pressure and deformation in non-conformal contacts. 3 credits (3 0 0)
Genesis of friction, friction in contacting rough surfaces, sliding Introduction to Energy Storage Systems (ESS), Types of Batteries,
and rolling friction, Various laws and theory of friction. Stick-slip their working mechanisms and characteristics, Applications of
friction behaviour, frictional heating and temperature rise. Friction Batteries and ultracapacitors in Electric Vehicles, Component sizing
measurement techniques. Wear and wear types. Mechanisms of wear and simulations, Comparison between different cell chemistry
- Adhesive, abrasive, corrosive, erosion, fatigue, fretting, etc., Wear w.r.t. specific power, specific energy, safety, lifespan, performance,
of metals and non-metals. Wear models - asperity contact, constant cost etc; Battery design parameters for several Electric Vehicles,
and variable wear rate, geometrical influence in wear models, wear Battery Architecture, Battery passive components sizing, Isolation
damage. Wear in various mechanical components, requirements, Manufacturing of batteries, Battery modelling, form cell
wear controlling techniques. Introduction to lubrication. Lubrication to pack, Battery pack and design issues, Failures of batteries, Battery
regimes. Introduction to micro and nano-tribology. Pack Performance & Safety testing standards, Battery management
systems, Overview of safety circuits like over voltage and under
voltage protection, pre-charge circuit, isolation monitoring, HVIL (high
CTp704 Electric Vehicle Laboratory II
voltage interlock loop), MSD (manual service disconnect), Fuses etc.,
3 credits (1 0 4)
Overview of favorable and unfavorable storage conditions, impact of
Noise, vibration and harshness measurement of EV and its temperature on batteries.
components; Noise Source Characterization of EVs, Condition
Monitoring of Automotive Components, Failure analysis of Battery
CTL709 Charging Infrastructure for EVs
materials (microscopic and macroscopic analysis); Drive cycles for
electric vehicles; modelling and simulation of battery (Battery models 3 credits (3 0 0)
(electrical; thermal; mechanistic and its simulation) and NVH. Case National EV charging station status; Charger types; Charging station
study of EV platform. types; connectors; Plug-in Charging technologies; Charging Protocols
328

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Centre for Automotive Research and Tribology
& Connectors: CHAdemo, CCS , GB/T , ChaoJi (upcoming); slow CTL713 Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
charging; fast charging methods; CAN based and PLC based charging 3 Credits (3 0 0)
overview; thermal management; active and passive equalization;
Automotive safety integrity level; Vehicle System Design and its
overview of EVCC (electric vehicle charging controller) and its
components, Principles for path planning and decision making,
communication with allied components; Onboard charging & Off
Sensors Technology and Computational Algorithms, Design,
board charging technology , requirements , global standards & Indian
Architecture and Evaluation of Automotive Systems, Control Essentials
standards communication between on board charger, controller, BMS,
for Automotive Systems, Modelling, Simulation and Optimization
VCU (vehicle control unit) and charging station; Constant current and
for Transportation systems, Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
constant voltage charging during various battery SOC; Sustainable
(ADAS), Security Aspects for Connected Vehicles, Safe practices and
Charging systems; Solar Powered Charging stations; V2H, V2X, Vehicle
regulatory standards.
to Vehicle, Vehicle to Grid, Vehicle to Home, Building & Dynamic load
management of chargers.
ITL714 Failure Analysis and Repair
4 Credits (3-0-2)
ITL709 Maintenance planning and Control
Introduction, need for failure analysis, Classification of failures,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fundamental causes of failures, influence of type of loading (e.g.
Power Train Domain; Chassis Domain; Active/Passive Safety;
static, fatigue, shock, etc.) on nature of failures, Role of stress;
Diagnostic; Architecture Description Languages for Automotive
processing and fabrication defects, Effect of residual stresses
Applications; Objectives and working methods of SAR; Main Areas of
induced during fabrication processes, Influence of temperature and
AUTOSAR Standardization: Methodology and Templates; AUTOSAR
environment on failure, Crack and subsurface crack like defects and
in practice; Road Transport and Its Evolution; Congestion Problem;
their significance in failure.
Energy and Emissions; Sensor Technologies; Sensor Fusion; Wireless
Micro mechanisms of failures; Ductile and brittle fracture, Fracture
Network Technologies; Intelligent Control Applications; Latest Driving
initiation and propagation, Fatigue failures, Wear related failures,
Assistance; Intelligent Autodiagnostic; Automated road vehicles; road
High temperature failures, low temperature failures, etc., Studies and
network and road management; In-Car Embedded Networks; Open
analysis of failed surfaces. Identification of failures, Techniques of
Issues for Automotive Communication Systems; Star Topologies
failure analysis, Microscopic methods, Fracture mechanics techniques,
and Communication for CAN; Working principle and advantages of
Prediction of failures, Residual life assessment and life extension,
ethernet over present LIN and CAN network.
Typical case studies in failure analysis, Logical fault finding and its
application, Inspection and safety measures, Repair techniques and
ITL710 Design of Tribological Elements
economic considerations, Failure analysis for design improvement
3 Credits (3-0-0) and proactive maintenance, Design for repairbility, Case Studies.
Introduction-Tribological consideration in design, Conceptual design,
Classification of tribological components, Mechanisms of tribological CTL715 Electric Energy Storage Systems
failures in machines, Zero wear concept, Computational techniques 3 Credits (3 0 0)
in design. Design of Dry Frictional Elements-Dry friction concepts,
Energy storage systems for electric transportation, smart grid, and
Brakes and Clutches, Friction belts and Dry rubbing bearing. Design
renewable energy systems; working principles of batteries (various
of Fluid Frictional Elements- Fluid friction concepts, Design of
chemistries), high power ultra capacitors, and energy dense fuel cell
hydrodynamically loaded journal bearings, externally pressurized
systems; battery energy management techniques as well as ultra
bearings, Oscillating journal bearings, Externally pressurized bearings,
capacitor power management techniques; power electronics for
Design of oil groove, Design of elliptical, multi-lobe and titled pad
energy and power management; Hybrid energy storage systems and
bearings. Rolling elements bearings, Performance analysis of bearings,
controller development; charging and infrastructure design.
gears, seals, piston rings, machine tool slide ways, cams and follower
and wire rope.
CTL 717 power Electronics and Drives for Electric
Vehicles
CTL711 Embedded Systems for Automotive Sector
3 Credits (3 0 0)
3 Credits (3 0 0)
Global overview of Transportation electrification, Role of Power
National EV charging station status; Charger types; Charging station
Electronics and Drives in Transportation Electrification; Vehicle system
types; connectors; Plug-in Charging technologies; Charging Protocols
dynamics; Introduction to Electromagnetic Energy Conversion; Electric
& Connectors: CHAdemo, CCS , GB/T , ChaoJi (upcoming); slow
drivetrain system; System design considerations, rating and sizing
charging; fast charging methods; CAN based and PLC based charging
of electric drivetrain components; Machines and drives for traction
overview; thermal management; active and passive equalization;
and EVs: BLDC, PMSM, IM, SRM; Control of Electric Drives; Starter-
overview of EVCC (electric vehicle charging controller) and its
generators in HEV; Battery Charging; Bidirectional DC-DC converters;
communication with allied components; Onboard charging & Off
Control of grid-connected converters; Architectures, modelling and
board charging technology , requirements , global standards & Indian
simulations of electric drivetrains, Case study; Railway Traction,
standards communication between on board charger, controller, BMS,
Aircraft Power Generation.
VCU (vehicle control unit) and charging station; Constant current and
constant voltage charging during various battery SOC; Sustainable
ITL717 Corrosion and its Control
Charging systems; Solar Powered Charging stations; V2H, V2X, Vehicle
to Vehicle, Vehicle to Grid, Vehicle to Home, Building & Dynamic load 3 Credits (3-0-0)
management of chargers. Importance of corrosion control in industrial practices, Thermodynamics
of corrosion, Broad forms of corrosion – uniform, uneven, pitting,
cracking, etc. influencing factors on corrosion. Surface film,
ITL711 Reliability, Availability and Maintainability
Polarisation and effect, Theory of passivity, kinetics of corrosion,
(RAM) Engineering
Various types of corrosion along with case studies – Galvanic,
3 Credits (3-0-0) Thermogalvanic, High temperature corrosion, Intergranular, Pitting,
System concepts in RAM Engineering, Fundamentals of reliability, Selective attack (leaching), fretting corrosion – erosion, cavitation,
Failure distributions, Statistical analysis of failure data, Weibull Stress corrosion cracking, hydrogen embrittlement, etc., Various
analysis, Monte Carlo simulation, System reliability assessment. techniques for corrosion evaluation and monitoring, Corrosion Control-
Reliability of repairable and non-repairable systems. Point, mission Design improvement, Selection of material, fabrication process for
and steady state availability. Availability assessment. Maintainability corrosion control, Role of residual stress, Changes in operating
and its assessment. Design for reliability and maintainability’, Practical conditions, Use of inhibitors, Anodic and Cathodic protection,
applications of RAM Engineering to systems, products and processes. Corrosion resistant coatings, Case studies.
329

CTL719 Energy Storage Systems for EVs 3 0 0 3
Centre for Automotive Research and Tribology Courses of Study 2024-2025
CTL720 Vehicle System Dynamics and Control CTL731 Automotive Noise and Condition Monitoring
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3 0 0)
Introduction to the automobile, different subsystems and assemblies Introduction to Noise, Vibration, Harshness, Noise measurement
in an automobile, modeling of tires, chassis, suspension, steering, parameters, Standards and Techniques, Instrumentation for noise
transmission and brakes. Understanding subsystems responsible measurement and analysis, Noise Source Characterization and Control,
for ensuring satisfactory longitudinal, lateral and vertical dynamics Noise and Vibration control measures in Automobile, Sound Quality
performance of vehicles. Suspension kinematics and compliance, and Human Response. Maintenance strategies and requirement of
brake design and force portioning; anti-lock braking; vehicle condition monitoring in Automotive, Instrumentation of Condition
stability and tire friction ellipse; traction control; different types Monitoring techniques and its application. Signal analysis, and
of vehicle transmission systems, steering and handling; ride classification of faults. Automotive elements health monitoring, Concept
quality and suspension control; introduction to hybrid and electric of Machine learning and IoT in condition monitoring of Automobile.
vehicles. Vehicle control: longitudinal acceleration control; yaw rate Case Studies on Automobile Noise and Condition Monitoring.
control; lateral positioning; path planning/tracking; adaptive cruise
control; automatic vehicle following and convoys. Testing of vehicle CTL732 Advanced Vehicle propulsion
performance and handling; lab based and field-testing approaches; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Different sophistications of lab based vehicle testing: MIL, SIL and HIL.
Motivation for using hybrid vehicles, Preliminary concepts:
Thermodynamic processes, Engine power cycles, fuel -air and
CTL725 Recycling, Reusability and Remanufacturing actual cycles, Ignition and valve timing, Combustion fundamentals
3 Credits (3 0 0) in SI and Cl engines, Mixture preparation: stoichiometric. rich and
Physical components of batteries; sources of the battery materials; lean mixtures, Combustion stoichiometry and modeling, exhaust
Recycling methods, current status of recycling both national and formation, Emission norms & testing, Engine performance testing
abroad, worldwide directives/policies for spent batteries, importance and turbocharging, Vehicle transmission and traction requirements,
of recycling and its environmental impacts, mechanical recycling Motivation for HEVs, Engine sizing for HEY, Hybrid vehicle categories
processes, grinding, washing, separating, drying, re-granulating and architectures. Electric Machines: Principles, modelling and control,
and compounding, NMP-dissolving, ultrasonic treatment, alkaline- Energy storage technologies: electrical and mechanical. Battery
leaching, Second-life batteries, life-cycle assessment of battery modelling and characterization, Battery pack design, management
recycling, redesign, reuse, and recycling, partial disassembly of the and control, Practical examples of hybrid vehicles, Fuel cell technology
battery, removal of substandard cells, replacement of these cells, and and classification.
reassembly of the battery
CTL735 Computer Aided Analysis of power Electronics
3 Credits (3 0 0)
CTL727 Materials for Electric Vehicle Applications
Driving cycles for EVs; Design driving factors; Vehicle System
3 Credits (3 0 0)
Modelling; Real time controllers: Compilers, linkers, debuggers,
Understanding the materials: Introduction, Classification of materials,
Interrupt based programming; Different PWM schemes and
Fundamentals of materials, Properties of Materials, Manufacturing
generation; Design and simulation of basic converter topologies,
methods for materials, Structure-property relationship, Materials of
drivetrains; PWM switching and average converter model; Controller
Steels and other metallic materials, Functionality of EV components:
design and stability analysis; EMI/EMC design considerations in PCB
Working principles of Motor and mechanical stresses, Working
design of power electronics; Thermal analysis for power electronic
principles of Battery and thermomechanical stresses, Fundamentals
components; Failure analysis techniques: Introduction to Failure mode
of friction and wear, Working principles of Bearing and Friction
and effect analysis, Automotive industry safety standard (ISO 26262),
materials, Failure aspect and Issues associated with EV components
Automotive electronics council, Problem solving techniques: Fault tree
(Friction and wear, Corrosion, EMI/EMC, etc.). Requirements on EV
analysis techniques, A3 problem solving techniques.
materials: Materials selection strategies for Structural application,
Motor, Battery, Brake, Bearing.
CTL736 Design of Motors for Automotive Application
3 Credits (3-0-0)
CTL729 Automotive Reliability and Life Testing
Pre-requisite(s): ELL203
3 Credits (3 0 0)
Course Contents: Classification of EV motors, sizing procedures,
Fundamentals of Reliability, Availability and Maintainability, Failure
winding design and analysis, materials in Ev motors, design techniques
distributions, Failure Analysis (FMEA, FTA etc.) Statistical analysis of
of different topologies of PM motors, synchronous reluctance and:
failure data, parametric and Non parametric methods. System reliability
switched reluctance motors, performance analysis and parameter
assessment. Availability assessment. Maintainability and its assessment.
computation, analysis of cogging torque and torque ripple and their
Design for reliability and maintainability’, Practical applications of
mitigation techniques, loss modelling and thermal analysis.
RAM Engineering to Automotive. Reliability Testing, Accelerated
Life Testing, Highly Accelerated Life Testing, Highly Accelerated
ITL740 Risk Analysis and Safety
Stress Screening, Recent Development in Life Testing. Importance
of Life testing on Automobile components and sub components. 3 Credits (2-1-0)
Introduction, Typical hazards, Accident indices, Fire and explosion
ITL730 Lubricants hazards, Dow’s fire and explosion index, Hazards identification
procedures for plants and machinery; Preliminary hazard analysis
3 Credits (2-0-2)
(PHA), Fault Hazard Analysis (FHA), Hazard and operability (HAZOP),
Overview of friction ( F), wear (W) and lubrication, Primary role
What if, Check lists, Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), Failure
of lubricants in mitigation of F & W & heat transfer medium,
mode, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA), HAZAN: Hazard
Composition and properties of lubricant; Types of lubricants such as
analysis; FTA (Fault tree analysis), ETA (Event tree analysis), and CCA
mineral oil based, synthetic lubricants, solid lubricants, and greases;
(Cause consequence analysis), Transportation of hazardous materials,
Characteristics properties of lubes & greases; their evaluation
Safety audit, Health and safety aspects of lubricants, Human factors in
methods, Classification systems such as API, SAE, AGMA, NLGI,
safety, Risk evaluation and acceptance criteria, Disaster management,
ISO; Additives such as Viscosity-index improver (VII); Anti-oxidant
Safety codes and Case studies.
(AO); Anti-friction (AF) Antiwear (AW) Extreme-pressure (EP);
Corrosion inhibitors (CI), detergents, dispersants; Selection criteria
CTL741 Advanced Motors for Electric Mobility
for lubricants for various tribological situations and applications; Used
4 Credits (3-0-2)
lubes-environment & health hazards and disposibility and recycling,
evaluation of oil degradation by various techniques. Pre-requisite(s): ELL203 (for UG Students)
330

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Centre for Automotive Research and Tribology
Review of standard EV motors and their limitations, Motivation to Deformation of bearing surfaces-Contact of smooth and rough solid
develop advanced EV motors, Configurations of different advanced surfaces, elasticity equation, Stress distribution and local deformation
motors (e.g. five-phase or six-phase induction and permanent magnet in mating surfaces due to loadings, methods to avoid singularity
motors, stator PM machines, PM Vernier machines), sizing of such effects, Estimation of elastic deformation by numerical methods-
advanced motors, winding design and analysis of advanced motors, Finite Difference Method (FDM), Governing equation for evaluation
control techniques and performance analysis of advanced EV motors of film thickness in Elastohydrodynamic Lubrication (EHL) and its
and drives in motoring and regenerative braking mode. solution, Boundary conditions. Development of computer programs
for mathematical modeling of flow in bearings, Numerical simulation
ITL752 Bulk Materials Handling of elastic deformation in bearing surfaces by FDM.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
JID800 Minor project
Nature of bulk materials, Flow of gas-solids in pipelines, Mechanical
Handling equipments like screw conveyors, belt conveyors and bucket 3 Credits (0-3-0)
elevators, Pneumatic conveying systems- Components, Design and The students will select a research topic for the minor project. It
Selection, Troubleshooting and Maintenance of pneumatic conveying is expected that such topics would involve understanding of basic
systems, Performance evaluation of alternative systems, Bend processes and applications.
erosion-influencing factors, materials selection and potential solutions,
Case studies, and Design exercises. JIS800 Independent Study
3 Credits (0-3-0)
ITL760 Noise Monitoring and Control
This is meant only for such students who are selected for DAAD
3 Credits (2-0-2)
fellowship.
Introduction to noise, Properties of noise, Loudness and weighting
networks, Noise measurement parameters and standards, Impulse JID801 Major project-part-I
noise, Frequency analysis - octave, one third octave and FFT analysis,
6 Credits (0-0-12)
Instrumentation for noise measurement and analysis, Sound power,
Sound intensity measurement technique with applications, Noise The students will select a research topic for the major project. It
source location, Noise diagnostics, Noise monitoring of machines with is expected that such topics would involve understanding of basic
examples, Estimation of machinery noise, Cepstrum analysis, Noise processes and extensive experimentation.
control methods, Maintenance and noise reduction, Road vehicle and
aircraft noise sources and control, Case studies. CTD802 M.Tech. Major project part II
12 credits (0-0-24)
ITL810 Bearing Lubrication
3 Credits (3-0-0) Minor project
Introduction-Historical background, Bearing concepts and typical 3 Credits (0-0-6)
applications. Viscous flow concepts-Conservation of laws and its
derivations: continuity, momentum (N-S equations) and energy, JID802 Major project-part-II
Solutions of Navier-Strokes equations. Order of magnitude analysis,
12 Credits (0-0-24)
General Reynolds equation-2D and 3D (Cartesian and Cylindrical),
Various mechanisms of pressure development in an oil film, The research topic selected in Part-I shall continue in Part-II also.
Performance parameters.
CTD895 MS Research project
Boundary Layer Concepts-Laminar and turbulent flow in bearings,
mathematical modeling of flow in high-speed bearings. Elastic 36 Credits (0-0-72)
331

Centre for Biomedical Engineering
BML300 Introduction To Healthcare Engineering BMV700 Biomechanical Design of Medical Devices
3 Credits (2-0-2) 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): APL100, ELL101, MCP100 Introduction. Mechanics of cells and Tissues. Basics of Finite Element
Modelling of tissues and organs. Design and Fabrication of Microfluidic
Introduction to healthcare challenges in India, which can be met
devices. Design of diagnostic devices. Design of Endocrinal devices.
with products for diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. What is
Design of orthopaedic devices. Design of cardiovascular devices.
Biomechanics, Different types of biomechanics, Gait Analysis, Tissue
Student presentations on innovative designs.
Mechanics, Computational and Experimental Modelling Techniques,
Device Tissue Interactions. What are Biomaterials? Categories, and
BMV701 Basic Electronics
their use across implants, tissue replacements, medical devices, and
other biomedical applications. Fabrication methods and Applications 1 Credit (1-0-0)
in Medical Device Development, Wound Healing, Tissue Engineering Fundamentals of Electronics, Electronics components and their
(Bioprinting) and Drug Delivery. Bioelectronic Devices, Wearable principle of operation with respect to medical equipments. Operational
devices, Bionic Prosthetics and Orthotics. Biosensors for Disease Amplifiers and their use in biomedical instrumentation. Electronic
Diagnosis and Monitoring. Role of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and interfacing of analog circuits with computer. LabVIEW based virtual
Machine Learning (ML). Biomedical Imaging Techniques. Multiscale instrumentation. Electronic signal conditioning.
Imaging Modalities: From Cells to Organs. Overview of MRI, CT, and
Ultrasound. Diagnosis of Key Diseases and Injuries. Latest Innovations BMV702 Basic Mathematics for Biologists
in Medical Imaging. Medical Devices and Implants. Different device 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Classes, their Fabrication, Testing, and Regulatory requirements.
Introduction to calculus, function, sets, Derivatives, integrals,
Mechanical Stability, Biocompatibility, Corrosion, Fatigue and Failure.
exponentials and logarithm, complex numbers, sequence, series.
Recent Innovations in Healthcare Products, Clinical Testing. Careers in
Linear Algebra: Matrix, vector, basic operations on matrix, system of
Biomedical Engineering, Advanced Academic and Industry Research,
equations, linear and non linear equations. Differential Equations.
Start-up, and Giving back to the Society.
Exposure to other topics like complex analysis, Fourier series.
Hands on experiments on Soft Tissue Characterization, Fabrication of
Biomaterials, Gait Analysis, Sensor Fabrication, EEG and EMG, Signal BMV703 Basic biology & physiology
Processing, Data Analysis and AI-ML Application, Imaging Modalities
1 Credit (1-0-0)
(MRI, CT, Ultrasound), and Implant Manufacturing.
Basics of biology: Biomacromolecules, cells, biological membranes,
BML330 Safety principles for Engineers Enzymes and enzyme catalysis, cellular metabolic pathways, cell cycle,
cell division, molecular biology of cell, gene expression, DNA and its
3 Credits (3-0-0)
role in hereditary, cell signalling and communication. Microbiology
Pre-requisite(s): EC 60 - bacteria, fungi and prokaryotes, their cytological features and
Value theory-Risk and Reliability-Decision theory. Injury and damage genetics. Human anatomy, organs and systems, hormones, nervous
control. Epidemiology of accidents. Human tolerance to energy and sensory systems, nutrition, Innate and adaptive immunity.
inputs. Biomedical/biomechanical aspects of long term exposure to
hazardous environment. Socio-technical aspects of safety standards. BMV704 Mechanics of Biomaterials
Case studies of well known disasters. 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Forces and moments. Free body diagrams. Elastic, Plastic, Visco-
BML401 Healthcare Entrepreneurship
elastic, visco-plastic. Bending, torsional and shear strength. Stress-
3 Credits (2-0-2)
strain relationships of linear and non-linear solids. Fatigue loading
Pre-requisite(s): BML300 with and without corrosion. Fluid mechanics - Shear thinning and
Introduction to major healthcare problems and challenges in India, shear thickening fluids
Healthcare Start-up ecosystem in India, Academia vs Industry,
Customer Requirements and Psychology, Healthcare Product Idea BVQ706 Graduate Students Eesearch Seminar
and Implementation Strategy, Team Building, Business Model 1 Credit (0-0-2)
Development, Bootstrapping Startup (i.e., How to minimize cost and In this course students will be required to conduct a through study
resources). on one of the seminar papers relevant in the field of biomedical
Critical review of healthcare products and business ideas presented engineering. The study paper should be approved by the coordinator.
by students, and team building. Effective Customer Survey, Market Each student registered for the course have to deliver a seminar and
Competition (analysis of novelty, need, barrier to entry, cost and be carried out in workshop mode.
resources), Product features. Low-cost Product development and
Short-Term Funding Avenues, Grant Writing. BML707 Molecular Bioengineering for Human Health
Product Beta Testing (Identification and use of in-house facilities 3 Credits (3-0-0)
and outsourcing) and Clinical Testing. Regulatory Approvals, Quality
Clinical aspects of Molecular interactions: Central dogma
Standards, and Intellectual Property. Short-term pilot study to
of Molecular Biology, Transcription, Translation, post-translational
understand customer acceptance. Product Launching Avenues
modifications, Protein-Binding interactions, pH-pKa.
(Online/Distributor/Crowdfunding). Customer Engagement (social
Integrative physiology & pharmacology: Systems approach to
media, Word-of-mouth, partners). PASS/FAIL Project Review.
Physiology, Control Systems & Homeostasis, Mass balance, Osmosis
Startup company formation steps. Biomedical Startup Scalability
& Osmolarity, ICF vs ECF, Membrane transport theory, Routes of drug
and Sustainability.
administration (ADME), transport kinetics, AUC, half-life, Vd, Cmax,
Group Project, healthcare product development and deployment
Drug metabolism, Excretion. Understanding Biological barriers in
(Online/Distributor/Crowdfunding): Hands on.
Drug delivery.
BML700 Introduction to Basic Medical Sciences for Microbes for Human health: Introduction to human microbiome,
Engineers Microbial community composition, Food-microbiome relationship (incl.
3 Credits (3-0-0) prebiotics), Dysbiosis and related microbial therapies, Introduction to
Omics and Data-in-a-vial (Industry-oriented module).
Anatomical and physiological study of different human systems.
Cell and tissue organization and metabolism Cardiovascular System;
BML710 Industrial Biomaterial Technology
hemodynamics, blood, conduction system in the heart. Soft and hard
tissues and joints endocrine and nervous system and their role in 3 Credits (3-0-0)
homeostasis; Respiratory physiology; kidneys and the urinary system. Good Manufacturing practice regulations, biomedical materials, quality
332

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biomedical Engineering
assurance and quality control, Labeling, Device failure, synthetic and signal processing- cardiac rhythm, formants and pitch in speech-
biopoloymers, Bioerodible materials, Host reactions to biomaterials, patellofemoral crepitus, application to EMG signals;
Sterilization of Medical devices, Advances in Sterilization Technology
of clean room, Polymeric materials for drug delivery systems, active BML 735 Biomedical Signal and Image processing
and passive targeting, intelligent materials. 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Introduction to Biomedical Signal and Image data obtained using
BML713 Pharmaceuticals, Efficacy and Delivery
various techniques (ECG, FTIR, NMR spectroscopy, MRI, CT, nuclear
3 Credits (3-0-0) imaging, ultrasound and optical imaging). Noise and error propagation
in Biomedical Signal and Image data. Basic statistics for biomedical
Pre-requisite(s): 75 earned credits (only for UG students)
signal and image data analysis. Biomedical signal processing in time
Overlap with: BBL445, SBL706/709 domain. Fourier and Laplace transform. Biomedical signal processing
Introduction to Pharmaceuticals, Overview of Pharmaceuticals in frequency domain. Biomedical image processing, including
Development, Uptake, Distribution, Pharmacokinetics, Pharmaceutical segmentation, registration and pattern recognition. Mathematical
Transporters, its metabolism, and Toxicity, Case Studies: Antibiotic, models used in biomedical signal and image data analysis.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease, Diabetic Medicine, Cancer
Drugs, more drugs, modification of Pharmaceuticals, delivery of BML737 Application of Mathematics in Biomedical Engg.
Pharmaceuticals.
2 Credits (2-0-0)
Mathematical functions commenly used in biomdeical engineering;
BML 714 Advanced Neuromechanics
biomedical data, data analysis (Basic Biostatistics), data fitting;
4 Credits (3-0-2) refreshing Engineering Mathematics; Applications of Mathematcs in
Pre-requisite(s): 60 Credits for Outside CBME Students various areas of Biomedical Engineering (Biochemistry, Biomedical
Signal and Imaging, Biosensors, Biomechanics, etc.), Mathematical
Neural control of movement: review of basic membrane
modeling and simulations.
physiology, muscle morphology, motor units, sliding filament theory,
size principle. Reflex arc motor pathways in the brain, proprioception
and exteroception, sensory pathways and receptors. BML738 Biomedical Data Analysis
Muscle mechanics: muscle-modelling, basic anthropometry, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
kinetics, and kinematics, joint torques and moments, muscle power Pre-requisite(s): 90 Credits for UG students. For PG students
and work.
with mathematics till 10+2 level only, bridge course (BMV702)
Electrical biosignatures of movement: biophysics of EMG and
is compulsory.
EEG signals, EMG instrumentation, signal processing and analysis
of EMG signals EEG recording, basic filtering and artifact rejection, Overlap with: BML800, BML735, MAL503/517/100, CHL761,
event related potentials, time-frequency analysis. MEL707, MTL108, MTL390, COL341/774, ELL409/784, SBL701,
Movement pathologies, biomechatronic device and therapies: MSL892
selected neuromuscular pathologies. Prosthetic devices, orthotic Overview of biomedical data and its analysis. Basics of statistics in
devices neuromodulation techniques. relation to biomedical data analysis. This will cover learning about
data distributions, continuous and discrete data, data representation
BML720 Medical Imaging (histogram, box and whisker plot, etc.) normality test, descriptive
3 Credits (3-0-0) statistics (mean, standard-deviation, mode, kurtosis, etc.), inferential
statistics (t-test, F-test, etc.), receiver-operating-characteristic (ROC)
Overview of medical imaging modalities. Radiation physics. X-ray
curve analysis, correlations, etc. Pre-processing of data, qualitative,
background, physics, principles, instrumentation, developments,
and quantitative analysis. Applications of mathematics in biomedical
applications. CT background, physics, principles, instrumentation,
data analysis, including mathematical modeling, simulations, data
developments, applications. MRI background, physics, principles,
fitting, and error analysis. Data compression and separation using
instrumentation, developments, applications. Ultrasound background,
SVD, PCA and ICA. Applications of Fourier transforms, Laplace
physics, principles, instrumentation, developments, applications.
transform, Basics of machine learning and its application in biomedical
Nuclear (SPECT, PET, Gamma) background, physics, principles,
data analysis. Basics of machine learning: feature, normalization,
instrumentation, developments, applications. Optical Imaging
training, validation and testing, data prediction, regression, data
background, physics, principles, instrumentation, developments,
classification, classifiers, logistic regression, support-vector-machine,
applications. Contrast enhanced imaging modalities - physics, latest
random forest classifier, feature selection, and optimization of
developments, applications. Emerging imaging modalities (microwave,
parameters of classifiers. Advanced machine learning approaches
electrical impedence,etc.) -physics, latest developments, applications.
(neural network, deep learning, etc.) and their applications in
biomedical data analysis.
BML734 physiological Signal processing
3 Credits (3-0-0) BML740 Biomedical Instrumentation
Overview of bio-signals: Physiological origins of bio-signals: 3 Credits (3-0-0)
bio-electric signal, bio-magnetic signals, bio-chemical signals, bio- Generalized medical instrumentation systems and transducers-
mechanical signals, bio-acoustic signals, bio-optical signals. Digital Systems for biomedical instrumentation -Introduction to
physiological signal acquisition: biosensors, transducers, Microprocessor, Microcontroller, Digital Signal Processors, Introduction
amplifier, Analog & digital filters, data storage and display. to Control systems- open loop and closed loop system, Transfer
Function, P, PI, and PID Controllers. Genesis and recording of
Time & frequency domain representation of bio signals:
biosignals, ECG Instrumentation, Biomechanical measurements-
Periodic, aperiodic and impulse signals; Sampling theorem ; Laplace
kinematics, kinetics, anthropometry, Ear and Ophthalmological
and Fourier transforms;
measurement - Ear Hearing loss, Sound conduction system, Basic
Modelling biomedical systems: linear system properties -time-
and Pure tone audiometer, Evoked response audiometer, Vision
domain and frequency-domain representation of linear system;
- Tonometer, Ophthalmoscope, Perimeter, Blood related physical
impulse response of systems; transfer function, frequency response
measurements - sound, flow, volume, and pressure. Clinical
of first and second order linear time invariant systems, convolution,
Laboratory Instrumentation - Introduction to electrochemistry,
correlation Discrete time systems - impulse response, frequency
medical diagnosis with chemical test, Spectrophotometer,
response, discrete Fourier transform, Z transform; basics of IIR and
Colorimeter, Auto analyzers, clinical flame photometer, selective
FIR filter.
ion based electrodes, Pathology Instrumentation - Flow Cytometer,
Parametric system modelling; case studies in physiological Haemocytometer, Haemoglobinometer, Anaesthesia Instrumentation -
333

Biomedical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Need of anaesthesia, anaesthesia delivery system, breathing circuits. therapeutics, vaccines and medical devices. Clinical trials and current
Ventilators, Diathermy, Introduction to instrumentation in X-Ray, good manufacturing Practices. Basic introduction to IPR. Post-market
MRI, CT scan, Introduction to MEMS. Electrical safety in medical issues and requirements.
environment - shock hazards, leakage current, safety codes, electrical
BML770 Fundamentals of Biomechanics
safety analyzer, testing of biomedical equipments.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
BML741 Medical Device Design Overview and significance or biomechanics to lead a better life,
4 Credits (2-0-4) challenges and opportunities, inventions/research. Orthopaedic
Introduction to medical device design course and its significance in components - bones, tendons, ligaments and cartilages -primary
the current scenario; basic human physiology, communicable and functions, material constituents (osteoclasts, osetoblasts, collagen,
non-communicable diesese; different approaches to medical device collagen fibrils), mechanical strength, building vs recuperation rate,
design; considerations in medical device design; case studies of force analysis. Cardiovascular components-arteries, veins, primary
medical device design; identification of need, immersion, disease functions & flowrate, material constituents, mechanical strength,
burden, disease state fundamentals, and the need for validation; inflammation, life span vs. recuperation rate, force analysis.
development of concepts, ideation & brainstorming, evaluation Biomaterials - Metals/alloys, polymers, ceramics, shape-memory
of concepts, risk/benefit analysis; usability analysis & methods of alloys, composites and functionally graded materials. Basic Principles
prototyping; user feedback, stakeholder analysis & characterization; - Force-Motion, Force-Time, Inertia, Range of Motion, Segmental
IP and regulatory requirements; conclusions. Interaction, Balance, Cordination continuum, Projection & Spin. Force
analysis of Joints at various kinetic states - Spine (running, climbing,
BMD742 Minor Biodesign project stairs, running downhill etc), Knee (squatting, jumping, climbing
stairs, kickingsoccer), shoulder (abduction, adduction, bowling,
4 Credits (0-0-8)
smashing - racquet sports), Elbow (tennis, golf) and Hip (during fall,
The course will cover activities pertaining to design-build-test-modify running). Demonstrations - Characterization, fractures & ruptures,
iterations in order to build functional prototypes of medical devices. non-invasive analysis (MRI, CT scan).
BML743 Special Topics In Biodesign BML771 Orthopaedic Device Design
3 Credits (3-0-0) 2 Credits (2-0-0)
The course contents will be flexible covering state of the art design,
Pre-requisite(s): AML732/AML835/AML851/MEL739
research and innovation issues pertaining to biodesign.
Introduction: a. Bones, tissues and muscles, b. Properties; Static
BMp743 Basic Biomedical Laboratory and dynamic loads; Kinematics and Kinetics; Bone healing and
remodelling; Strength, Wear and Corrosion; Design of Orthopaedic
2 Credits (0-0-4)
prostheses; Methods to avoid reoccurance of fractures; Bone
Students shall be introduced with practical training on basic modelling; Guest lectures; Demonstrations.
electronic design and interfacing, and be given laboratory exercises
on bioinstrumentation. Students will also be exposed to the role of BML772 Biofabrication
medical imaging and signal processing in biomedical engineering. A
3 Credits (2-0-2)
few experiments training in materials synthesis, characterization and
modification of various biomaterials will be given. Students will also Pre-requisite(s): 50 Credits
get trained on sterile techniques of cell culture, cytotoxcity assays Introduction; bioprinting tissues, bones and cartilages; self-assembly,
and cell staining techniques. directed assembly, enzymatic assembly; laser-assisted bio-printing;
fabrication of scaffolds (hydrogel method and fibre based); artificial
BML750 point of Care Medical Diagnostic Devices bacteria (active/passive drug delivery, microswimmer); component
3 Credits (3-0-0) fabrication (stereolithography, laser machining etc); mass production
(stamping, micro-injection molding etc). Experiments: CAD
Brief introductions to analytical chemistry and biochemistry; sensors
(solidworks) and data import (from MRI/CT) - hands-on; Fused
and biosensors (immobilization, transducers, electronic components,
deposition molding (3D printing) - hands on; Fused deposition
op-amps and general circuits; data processing and presentation -
molding (3D printing) - hands on; Tissue & Organ printing (3D organ
LabVIEW based virtual instrumentation, etc.); Medical diagnostic
printer) - demonstration only; Scaffold generation - Hydrogel (Wet
techniques (biochemical, pathological, hematological analysis, DNA/
Chemistry) and Fibres (electrospinning) - hands on; Laser machining
RNA based analysis, etc.; Necessity for rapid and in-situ medical
- hands on; Mask generation (E-beam lithography and focussed ion
analysis; Point of care technology (POCT); Minaturization of
beam) -demonstration only; Characterization (Imaging, Profilometry,
medical diagnostic devices – Microfabrication (materials, processes,
optical scanner) - hands on; Stamping - hands on; Micro-injection
techniques for detection); Microfluidics (concept, procedure,
molding - demonstration only.
applications and challenges); Integrated microfluidic devices: Lab-
on-a-chip, system-on-a-chip, micro-total analysis system (µTAS);
BML774 Soft Tissue Characterization and Applications
Present research scenario and future prospects; Case studies on
4 Credits (3-0-2)
POCT devices; Laboratory visit and demonstration of microfabrication
processes and Lab-on-a-chip devices. Pre-requisite(s): APL100 for B.Tech students of all departments
Introduction to soft tissues. Review of major tissues and properties
BML760 Biomedical Ethics, Safety and Regulatory Affairs
(skin, muscles, connectives tissues). Study of anatomy and
2 Credits (2-0-0) biomechanical properties of tissues in all functional organs (e.g., brain,
Introduction to medical ethics and bioethics, environmental ethics. lungs, heart). Blood vessels, and extremities. Biochemical testing
Use of animals in pre-clinical trials and ethical approval. Ethics methods: In vivo and in vitro. Test protocol for soft tissue testing.
issues in biomedical sciences (inhalable, injectable, implantable Linear and non-linear mechanical properties. Effect of specimen size,
systems). Principles of biosafety. Biosafety cabinets, Laboratory varying strain rates, and loading orientation. Mechanical testing with
biosafety levels. vertebrates and invertebrates safety levels, Biosafety cadaveric tissues and soft tissue simulants. Finite element modelling
of infectious agents: bacteria, fungus, parasite, prions, viruses, of soft tissues. Study of digital image correlation (DIC). Hyperelastic
Biosafety of infectious agents: bacteria, fungus, parasite, prions, constitutive materials models (e.g., Mooney-Rivlin, Ogden). Soft
viruses. Laboratory security and emergency response, guidelines tissue degradation modes. Characterizing tissue weakening (age)
to work with infectious agents and toxins. Regulatory frameworks: and injury. Effect of impact loads. Soft tissue failure criteria, and
FDA, BIS, ISO certification, CDSCO; health & family welfare laws fracture modes. Effect of wounds on soft tissues properties. Soft tissue
and regulations on design, development, testing and production of biomechanics due to wound healing. Interaction of Soft tissues with
biomedical products, including biologics, drugs, biotechnology-derived interventions and medical devices. Effect of suturing, implantation,
334

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biomedical Engineering
penetration, and frictional interactions on soft tissues properties. BML810 Tissue Engineering
Project work: comparison of biomechanics properties of soft tissue 3 Credits (3-0-0)
samples through experiments, material characterization, DIC, and
The course will cover importance and scope of tissue engineering,
finite element simulations.
Introduction to biomaterials and scaffolds, Criteria of modifying
biomaterials as tissue engineering scaffolds, Properties and types of
Computational physiology scaffolds, Different methods employed in the synthesis of scaffolds,
3 Credits (2-0-2) animal cell biology, stem cells, organization of cells into tissues,
The course is a hands-on study of physiological mathematical tissue microenvironment, tissue injury and wound healing. Basic
models through a computing environment. Course will be focused on immunology, response of body to foreign materials. Animal cell culture
developing proficiency using mathematics and computation to analyze on scaffolds, consequences, optimization strategies and important
various biomedical engineering problems. Particular attention will considerations for Skin, Liver, Bone, Cartilage, Nerve and Vascular
be given to forward models, such as ordinary differential equation- tissue engineering.
based models drawn from cell and systems' physiological processes.
Examples include biochemical reaction networks, cellular homeostasis, BML815 Selected Topics in Biomedical Engineering
glucose-insulin, and respiratory systems. All the skills will be taught 2 Credits (2-0-0)
in the class. Select current and emerging topics in biomedical engineering will be
covered; details will be decided by the instructor.
BML781 Orthopedic Device Design and prototyping
3 Credits (2-0-2) BML820 Biomaterials
Pre-requisite(s): 75 credits for UG students 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Introduction: a. Bones, tissues and muscles, b. Properties; 2. Introduction to the use of implants. Structure and properties
Orthopedic requirements: a. Static and dynamic loads b. Kinematics and of materials used as implants : polymers, ceramics, metal and
Kinetics c. Bone healing, wound healing and remodeling; 3. Strength, composites; biological response to implants, wound healing process,
wear and corrosion of orthopedic devices a. Static strength b. Impact cellular response to foreign materials, criteria for selecting implants
& fatigue strength c. Wear and d. Biochemical erosion and corrosion both for soft tissue and hard tissue, polymers used as vascular
and e. biofilms; 4. Design of (a) orthopedic prosthesis for Wrist prosthesis, contact lens and reconstructive surgery materials.
fracture, elbow arthroplasty, shoulder fracture, total hip replacement,
spine fracture, femur fracture, total knee replacement, ligament BML830 Biosensor Technology
arthroplasty, and tibia fractures (b) orthotics for foot abnormalities 4 Credits (3-0-2)
(c) methods to avoid re-occurance of bone fracture and (d) modeling Measurements and instrumentation principles. Fundamentals
of bone; 5. Manufacturing techniques; 6. Regulatory requirements: of transducers and sensors, their sensitivity, specificity, linearity
Testing and certification; 7. Orthopedic devices case studies. and transduction system analysis. Introduction to biosensors;
transduction principles used in biosensors viz. electrical, optical,
BML790 Modern Medicine: An Engineering perspective microchip sensors and Surface acoustic wave devices and
3 Credits (2-1-0) transducers and related technology. Biotechnological components of
the sensor based on enzymes, antigen-antibody reaction, biochemical
The course will cover an overview of patho-physiology of some
detection of analytes, organelles, whole cell, receptors, DNA
of the common non-communicable human diseases. Details of
probe, pesticide detection, sensors for pollutant gases. Kinetics,
Cerebral Ischemia/Stroke, Diabetes and cardiac abnormalities will be
stability and reusability of sensors. Selected examples and future
discussed. With respect to each diseases the corresponding diagnostic
developments.
techniques, tools, and physical principles of these instruments will
be discussed. Students will be encouraged with lateral thinking and
BMV840 Emerging Biomedical Technology & Health Care
brain storming future engineering research potentials in improvement
of current diagnostic and treatment modalities. 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Importance of health related data collection and analysis,
BML800 Research Techniques in Biomedical Engineering Epidemiological survey; brief them about various communicable
& non-communicable diseases, path-physiological processes,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
environmental health and Life style diseases. Define the process
Simulation and analysis of physiological systems by up to date
of evolution of emerging technologies to solve the current health
computer techniques and development of physical models;
problems through an integrated approach of synergizing the discipline
Biomechanical analysis and network representation; State of
of medicine, engineering and management systems. Importance/
art bioinstrumentation techniques; monitoring physiological
methodology of conducting clinical trials-human & animals.
parameters electrical, mechanical and chemical parameters of
human body, Microminiaturization of electronics including MEMS;
BML850 Cancer: Diagnosis and Therapy
BIOMEMS technology; Biomedical signal processing and imaging
3 Credits (3-0-0)
modalities; Research planning and interpretation of biomedical data;
Telemedicine; Robotics in Medicine. Cancer and its classes; Hallmarks of cancer: Evasion of Apoptosis,
Limitless replicative potential, Sustained Angiogenesis, Inflammation;
BMD801 Major project-1 Causes of Cancer: Carcinogens, oncogenes, mutations, viruses,
disregulation of cell cycle and the checkpoints; Tumor architecture,
9 Credits (0-0-18)
Importance of Hypoxia and angiogenesis in cancer; Tumor metabolism,
The curriculum shall comprise of practical training on chosen research Metastatic potential of cancer; Cancer Stem Cells and Biomarkers of
topic, optimization of experimental conditions, so as to take up Cancer; Diagnosis of cancer: Biopsy, Imaging, Endoscopy, Blood
independent research in major project. work; Therapy: Chemotherapy (small molecule, nanoparticle based),
radiation, hyperthermia, immunotherapy, photodynamic, transplants
BMD802 Major project-2 and transfusions, targeted therapy, RNAi, non-invasive technologies;
12 Credits (0-0-24) Resistance in Cancer; Scientific advances for understanding the origin,
Students are expected to carry out research in biomedical engineering diagnosis and treatment of Cancer; Future prospects for cancer cure
disciplines and preferably be able to publish or communicate their and diagnosis.
work at the end of project. A total of 18 credits including 12 from this
curriculum shall enable them to submit M.Tech. Dissertation, which BML860 Nanomedicine
shall also be regarded as a publication. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
335

Biomedical Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
Introduction to some basic nanoscience: quantum confinement and wearable applications – flexible circuit design, power considerations,
its effect; surface plasmon etc. Nanomaterial synthesis including energy storage methods, energy harvesting, biodesign of wearable
bottoms-up and top-down approaches. The significance of nano technology- measurement, mechanical design and prototyping,
size, multiplexing and multilayering. Properties of nanoparticles and design for usability and ergonomics: target customer discovery,
its dependence on shape, size, charge and aspect ratio. Interface surveys, market competition and statistic, emerging applications
of nanoparticles with biological systems (cells, viruses, bacteria, in in rehabilitation – soft-robotic devices and assistive devices.
vivo etc.) Techniques used for nanoparticle characterization before Neuromodulation and neural recording applications, wearable haptics
and after biological interface. Functional nanomaterials for biological and biofeedback systems. Signal processing techniques and machine
and medical applications: Design criteria and synthetic protocols; learning methods in wearable devices.
Nanomaterials in tissue engineering, drug delivery, biosensors,
hyperthermia, photodynamic therapy, etc. Modulating the specific
BML890 Micro-nanodevices for Healthcare Technology
biological response by nanostructures. Nanotoxicology.
3 Credits (2-0-2)
BMV870 Vascular Bioengineering
Pre-requisite(s): UG : As per institute criteria.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
To access practical experiments at the Nanoscale Research
Embryology and formation of vascular networking in fetus and adult
Facility (NRF) IIT Delhi, it is obligatory to pass the qualifying
human body, autonomic nervous system influences, peculiarities
exam (safety/instrumentation) administered by the facility.
of micro and macro vasculatures, the physiological fluid dynamic
principles involved, the molecular level changes occurring in normal Introduction and historical perspective of MEMS (micro
and abnormal conditions like atherosclerosis, cancers, utero-placental electromechanical system) and BioMEMS, Moors law and Feynman
system and various imaging modalities. Scaling ('There is plenty of room at the bottom"), Why miniaturisation?
Dimensions and scaling challenges, electronics components
BML880 Healthcare Wearables: Design and Applications and operation principle, Processing, and fabrication techniques
3 Credits (2-0-2) for various active and passive substrate materials, microfluidics
systems, Micro- system technology to realise various biologically
Pre-requisites(s): BMV701 for CBME students with background
inspired systems, electrokinetic and molecular manipulation, sensor
in sciences and medicine. ELL202 or BMV701 for B.Tech.
principle, parameters and electrode design, sensing technologies
students of other departments. (electrochemical, electrostatic piezoelectric and thermal), micro
History and evolution of wearable devices, social aspects of actuators system, BioMEMS integrated analytical devices, Wearable
wearability, biochemical sensors, optical and acoustic sensors, and implantable BioMEMS device, Commercialised biomedical
smart materials for sensor and actuator design, bioelectronics for microdevices, Regulatory Considerations.
336

National Resource Centre for Value Education in Engineering
VEL700 Human Values and Technology to be understood in-depth with respect to the values of excessive
3 Credits (2-1-0) materialism and individualism, competitiveness and unlimited economic
growth on one hand and the values of compassion, fraternity and
Present state of society-achievements and maladies. Notions of
cooperation on the other. The practical sessions will be used to carry
progress, development and human welfare. Distinction between
out group exercises of planning and analysis of real life case studies.
‘pleasure’ and ‘happiness’, ‘good’ and ‘pleasant’, ‘needs’ and ‘wants’.
Are there any universal human values? Complementarity of values and
VEV736 Special Module on Sustainability-II
knowledge. Typical modern technologies- their impact on mankind.
Fundamental characteristics of modern technology-their relationship 1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
to values. Sustainability of modern technology. Values for harmonious (Same as VEV735).
and sustainable development. Rationales behind universal human
values. Values and humanistic psychology. Practical difficulties in living VEV737 Special Module on Civilization-I
upto these values typical dilemmas. Need for inner transformation.
1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
Various approaches towards purification of mind. Concept of holistic
This module will address one or more aspects of development of
development and holistic technology. Integrating scientific knowledge
civilizations and promotion of societal peace which have strong
and human values, understanding engineering ethics.
linkages with the value system of the society. This could include value
systems reflected in constitutions of different countries, the way a
VEL710 Traditional Knowledge Systems and Values
society deals with human rights and the like.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
The values inherent in The Traditional Knowledge Systems (TKS) VEV738 Special Module on Civilization-II
viz., respect for all life and non-life, respect for diversity; awareness 1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
of social and ecological impact of activities; self-sufficiency; (Same as VEV737).
sustainability, socially appropriate, use of local natural and knowledge
resources viz., decentralized, aesthetically pleasing, wealth distributive VEV739 Special Module on professional Ethics-I
etc. It would be emphasized that these values are inherently present
1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
in the framework of traditional knowledge systems and are not
This module will bring out the need for professional ethics as recognised
add-ons. Traditional Technologies which are developed as part of
by several professional bodies in the world through discussion of
the TKS framework are invented and tested in the field, where all
practical case studies and the underlying tenets of the code of
environmental and social interaction, in particular its effect on other
conduct of professional bodies. The course will initiate discussion
life-forms known and unknown are allowed to play their part. This
on reasons behind deviation from these tenets and the relevance
non-fragmented approach makes such knowledge holistic and avoids
of these tenets of professional ethics in the contemporary world.
the errors and pitfalls when technologies are applied on the basis of
incomplete or inadequate theories.
VEV740 Special Module on professional Ethics-II
1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
VEV731 Special Module on Inner Development-I
(Same as VEV739).
1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
This module will primarily consist of courses which address one VEV741 Special Module on Inner Development-III
or more aspects of inner development such as comprehensive
1 Credit (0.5-0-1)
mindfulness, in-depth intellectual understanding of oneself and one’s
aspirations, selfless service etc. These courses are expected to provide
VEV742 Introduction to Vocal Classical Music
a practical experience to the students in how small positive changes
can be brought about in one’s inner self through a systematic practice 1 Credit (0-0-2)
of looking within. Pre-requisite(s): At least 50 earned credits for undergraduate
students.
VEV732 Special Module on Inner Development-II The course will start with the introduction to a classical concert. A
1 Credit (0.5-0-1) top-down approach will be applied to identify the components in a
(Same as VEV731). concert, namely, different types of compositions and fundamental
elements. The elements of a composition including the raag (melody),
swar (notes), laya (rhythm), taal (meter) and lyrics will be discussed.
VEV733 Special Module on Leadership-I
This will be further dissected to identify the notes and movements
1 Credit (0.5-0-1) involved in a melody. The role of spontaneity and creativity in music
This module will address the strong linkages between the personal and how these are systematically developed will be discussed. The
values of an individual and the desirable qualities of a leader. Going differences between south and north Indian forms of music will be
beyond the theories, it will emphasize on the practical aspect of discussed. Discussion on other aspects and genres of music such as
looking within as well as connecting to the outside world and hence folk, regional, and popular music will also form part of the course.
developing the qualities of a leader.
The course evaluation will be through both practical and written
VEV734 Special Module on Leadership-II exams. Practical exam will be primarily listening based exams wherein
1 Credit (0.5-0-1) their level understanding on various aspects such as raag, swar, laya,
taal, lyrics, and different musical styles will be tested. Written exams
(Same as VEV733).
will focus on the understanding of the fundamentals and theoretical
aspects of music.
VEV735 Special Module on Sustainability-I
1 Credit (0.5-0-1) VED750 Minor project
This module will consist of courses which address one or more 3 Credits (0-0-6)
aspects of sustainability vis-a-vis the societal value system. The To carry out detailed studies (under the guidance of a faculty member)
three core components of sustainability, viz, sustainable use of on issues like Science, Technology and Human Values, Engineering
resources, environmental protection and equity in the society need Ethics, Sustainable Development, Scientific basis of human values etc.
337

Optics and photonics Centre
OpS310 Independent Study in Optics and photonics Introduction to Photonic Integration Circuit Technology, Basic
3 Credits (0-3-0) Waveguide Theory, passive Devices (Reflectorsl, Gratings, Mode
Converters, Couples, Interferometer).
Course content is flexible and will depend on the needs and interests
of individual students and will be set at the beginning of the course
in consultation with mentor faculty. OpV792 photonic Integrated Circuit (pIC) Technology:
Material, Fabrication, and Active Devices
OpL700 Optics and photonics for Engineers & Scientists
1 Credits (1-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Active Devices (Waveguide amplifiers and lasers and Photodetector),
Basic Optics: Geometrical Optics; EM Waves, Interference &. Photonic Integrated Circuits, Fabrication, Materials and different
Diffraction; Fourier Optics and Holography; Lasers; Polarization and platforms.
Anisotropy; Electro-& Acousto-Optic Modulation; Fiber & Integrated
Optics, Fiber Optical Communication; Nonlinear Optics: Quantum
OpV793 photonic Matrix processors for Artificial
Optics· Metamaterials.
Intelligence
OpD710 Mini project in Optics and photonics
1 Credits (1-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Photonic Matrix Processor, and application of PICs in meeting growing
Course content is flexible and will depend on the needs and interests hardware demand for artificial intelligence.
of individual students and will be set at the be inn in of the course
b the mentor faculty.
OpV794 Modes in Optical Waveguides
OpV791 Introduction to photonic Integrated Circuit 1 Credits (1-0-0)
(pIC) Technology Introduction to Waveguide Modes; Rectangular Waveguides; Circular
1 Credits (1-0-0) Waveguides; Optical Fibers; Planar Waveguides.
338

Centre for Rural Development and Technology
RDL700 Biomass production and interaction styles, Evaluation: Types, process, components,
3 Credits (3-0-0) methods, techniques, Framework & indicators for evaluating Training
Programmes Post Training factors, Tourism & Livelihoods, NTEP
Introduction to biomass and biomass classification, Phytobiomass:
based livelihood.
Primary production-photosynthesis, measurement of productivity and
statistical analysis of data. plant's nutrient cycles. Plant improvements- Field projects related to Natural resource based livelihoods.
Tissue culture and other vegetative methods, seed technology and
RDL710 Rural India and planning for Development
nursery raising. Biofertilizers., bioinoculants and biopesticides-
Organic manures., nitrogen fixers, phosphorus solubilizers and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
organic matter decomposers, allelopathy, interactions among micro Historical and Geographical Aspects: Ancient and present structure of
and macroflora and biological equilibrium. Plantations and cropping villages characteristics of rural life, zonal and regional peculiarities,
pattern agroforestry models, plantations crops, tuber crops, petro social and religious stratifications.
crops, forage crops and grasses. Soil and water conservation in farm,
Social Aspects: Influence of religion/tradition/superstitions,
grassland and forest management. Aquatic Phytobiomass-Floating
psychosocial and cultural background and practices, barriers, life
plants, submerged plants and potential aquatic algae biomass.
patterns including community living, status of women, migration.
Animal biomass: Cow, buffalo, goats, sheep and pigs. Fisheries and
General Aspects: Health education, nutrition, sanitation, housing,
bee keeping.
indebtedness, and bonded labour. Economic Aspects: General
RDL701 Rural Industrialisation: policies, programmes economic conditions, disparity, unemployment and wage pattern.
Changes in techniques of production and requirements of storage,
and Cases
transportation and marketing facilities, private and public finance, rural
3 Credits (3-0-0)
banks. Postal and other services. Political Aspects: Village Panchayats
Background: Rural Industrialisation, lndia's rural poverty and possible and links of rural society with state’s organisations; functions and role
solutions, Rural Industrialisation during planned era. Farm and of various organisations. Planning for Rural Development: Historical
Non-Farm Sector Synergy: Lessons from Asian experience, Rural perspective. Gandhian ideas and their impact; planning in independent
Industrialisation in China: Township and village enterprises. Rural India and emphasis on integrated rural development and attempts
transformation through decentralized technologies, Sustainable at rural reconstruction. Shift in development policies. Role of S&T
Livelihoods: Participatory Management Approach, Appropriate voluntary, government and other agencies in rural development.
strategy for Rural Industrialization, Policies for Rural Industrialisation
Entrepreneurship, Development for Rural Youth, Women and RDL722 Rural Energy Systems
appropriate Technology in Rural industrialization, Industrialization
3 Credits (2-0-2)
of rural areas around urban centres, Industrialization in tribal area,
Biomass based energy systems, pyrolysis: concept, types, technology
Role of Govt. and Financial Institutions in Rural Industrialization, Role
and waste management, gasification: concept, technology, design,
and Impact of District industries Centres in Rural Industrialization,
operation and uses, biogas technology. Biogas production using
Gramodaya Scheme and rural industrialization, Development of
various substrates including I1SW and industrial wastes, types
Handloom Industry, Growth of production & employment in KVIS
of digesters and feed materials, biogas power generation, biogas
in India, Rural Industrialisation through Artisanal industry, Rural
enrichment and bottling technology, entrepreneurship avenues in
Industrialisation: Case Studies, Industrialisation of a drought-prone
biogas sector, biogas to natural gas* BBG technology, bio diesel:
district: Grass root level planning, PURA Model of Rural Development,
potential and scope in 1ndi.r, Bio-diesel production technology:
Some successful case Studies.
uses and advantages. ethanol as alternate fuel, ethanol production
RDL702 Karigar & Traditional Industries Technologies, Uses and Advantages problems, Cook Stoves,
Multifuel and biomass cook stoves, improved chulhas, micro hydel:
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Site characterization, Hydro potential estimation, Micro Turbines-
Introduction to traditional Indian arts and industry. Classification of
Classification, design, sizing analyses, Hydel power utilities, Techno
artisans based of skills, Geographical distribution of skills and relation
economic feasibility and social issues. Animal power; Application
to sustainable development method. Traditional Wood working
and power generation, Solar Energy Technologies, Solar Pond, Solar
and products, Leather working and products, ceramic working and
Photovoltaic, Concept of Hybrid energy system: Value proposition
products, Jewellery working and principles, Home furnishing, stone
and benefits, creating renewable energy-based livelihood and micro
working and concept of home decor, Miscellaneous karigar and
enterprises Integrated Rural Energy Planning: Objectives, Technical
products.
options Benefits, Financial Incentives.
RDL705 Rural Resources and Livelihoods
RDL724 Technologies for Water and Waste Management
3 Credits (2-0-2)
3 Credits (2-0-2)
Overview of different Livelihood Systems, Socio-economic, cultural
Water and wastes: General considerations, Role of water in life,
and historic perspectives, Linkages between sustainable livelihood
Water crisis and causes, Concept of waste, Solid wastes and industrial
systems & development, Issues of subsistence and survival, challenges
effluents, Hazardous and toxic wastes, Natural cycles for zero
and threats, livelihood, Impact of globalization on livelihood systems,
waste systems, Eco sanitation, Water resources and management,
Formal and informal sector livelihood sources, Issue of Women,
Rainwater, runoff and ground water, Rainwater harvesting, Water
Agro-based/Post Harvest Technology based Livelihoods, Problems
storage and lifting devices, Processes for degrading waste, Role
and challenges for agro-based small enterprises, Natural Resources
of microbes, earthworms, Anaerobic Digestion, Aerobic processes,
based livelihoods, nature dependency, Scope, challenge for survival
hermo-chemical pathways, Water and waste in the domestic sector,
& enhancement of Natural Resource based livelihoods, Craft-based
Drinking water and non-potable uses, Domestic wastewater quality
livelihoods, Challenge/Problems of traditional crafts, Need and strategy
and recycling options, Domestic solid waste management, Micro
for preserving/revival of crafts and craftsmen, New product & service
enterprises for waste and water treatment, Agricultural systems,
based livelihoods, SWOT for survival & growth, Sustainable Resource
irrigation requirements and water audit. water conservation measures,
use and Livelihoods, Role of Continuing Education, Skill Development
Composting and its application, Water management in industries,
& EDP, Enterprise Management, SHGs, Cooperatives, Microenterprises
Water requirement industries, Environmental regulations, wastewater
Identifying entrepreneurial opportunities & mkt potential, Up scaling
treatment and recycling in rural industries.
Microenterprises to SMEs – Issues & Perspectives, Importance and
Scope of Training for Development, Goals for designing training
RDL725 Ecological perspective of Growth and
programmes for development Self Development, Organisational
Development
development, Team Building, Skill Training, Technology Transfer etc.,
Types and Methods of training & learning, learning paradigms, Training 3 Credits (3-0-0)
:Strategy and Designs, Need Assessment Training: Planning, Methods The concepts of ecological studies, valuation of environmental
339

Rural Development and Technology Courses of Study 2024-2025
resources, their scarcities and optimal usage. Concept of Biogas digestate as bio-fertilizer for sustainable farming. Energy
Sustainability. Global environmental issues. Monetary assessment of efficiency and economics of anaerobic digester for thermal, power
environment: theories, policies and valuation methods. The growth generation and compressed biogas applications. Life cycle analysis
and the environment: in search of the "optimal" scale of growth, (LCA) of anaerobic digester. Experiential learning of commercial scale
Sustainable Development. Population, poverty and the environment. biogas plant for power generation/compressed biogas production
application.
RDL726 Herbal, Medicinal and Aromatic products
3 Credits (2-0-2) RDL740 Technology for Utilization of Wastelands and
Herbal, Medicinal and Aromatic plants of India: Overview and Uses Weeds
Ayurveda, Siddha, Homeopath, Unani and Tribal systems of Medicine,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Role of Traditional 14edicine ln Primary Health Care, Identification
Land as a parameter in rural development. Wastelands and importance
of Medicinal and Aromatic plants, Classification of Medicinal plants,
of using them. Biomass growth on various types of lands, Introduction
Pharmacology and Phytochemistry, Medical Bio-prospecting and
to plant taxonomy, underutilized terrestrial plants and aquatic weeds,
Chemo prospecting, Biomarkers, Active principle and Phytomedicine,
flora of tropics, arid lands and hilly areas. Constituents of biomass,
Cultivation, Harvesting and Storage of 14edicinal and Aromatic plants:
biochemical and chemical conversion processes. Applications of
Organic farming of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Good Agriculture
biomass as unconventional plant-based source for food, cattle feed,
Practice, Post. Harvest Processing of Medicinal and aromatic Plants,
chemicals, fibres, construction materials and energy. An integrated
Cleaning and Washing, Drying, Grinding, Processing of Medicinal
technological approach to biomass and wasteland utilization. Possible
and Aromatic plants - Extraction, Purification of Active Principle/
ecological effects.
Phytomedicine * Distillation, Herbal food formulation, Herbal
cosmetics and cosmochemicals, Nutraceuticals, Mosquito control
RDL745 principles and Applications of Restoration
Products, Aromatheraphy, Herbal Veterinary medicine, Natural Dyes
Ecology
and Colours, Quality Control and Analysis.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Practical and Project related to Herbal, Medicinal and Aromatic
products. Pre-requisite(s): Minimum earned credits as per 700 level
course requirements
RDL727 Conservation and Recycling practice in Rural
Introduction to restoration ecology; causes and indicators of
Areas environmental degradation; ecosystem functions and services;
4 Credits (3-0-2) biodiversity conservation and human well-being; traditional and
Introduction to concept of conservation and sustainable growth. scientific ecological knowledge; natural regeneration; assisted
Traditional habits of rural Indian and other conservators. Effect of regeneration; bioremediation; planning, implementation, monitoring
geographical parameters on local conservation practices. Conservation and evaluation of restoration projects; post-implementation
principles for water usage/ energy usage and usage of artificial maintenance; challenges-strategic locations and timelines; effect
chemicals and systems. Conservation principles for sustainable of social, biological and policy factors; feasibility in terms of cost
agriculture. Rainwater harvesting and Drip irrigation systems. and benefits; terrestrial and aquatic ecosystem restoration; wildlife
Conservative practices for water usage. Usages of crop residues, restoration; role of community participation, education, economics,
Conservative food processing methods. Inclusion of health principles policy and regulations for success of restoration projects; impact
in food making. Conservative methods for rural housing and usage of ecological restoration in mitigation to climate change; global
of land for construction. Development of conservative principles for partnerships for ecological restoration.
rural planning. All these topics are taken from ancient lndian context.
RDD750 Minor project: Intensive Study on Topics of
RDL728 Rural Energy Assessment and planning Specific Interest
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (0-0-6)
Project work related to any topics of interest within the specified
Overlap with: ESL751
time frame.
Present energy sources; Energy conversion, trade and infrastructure;
Energy inclusion and development; Energy access and policy; RDp750 Biomass Laboratory
Rural Energy Database (REDB); Rural energy planning; Assessing
3 Credits (0-0-6)
local energy demand; Rural energy sources; Bioenergy resource
assessment; Solar energy resources assessment; Wind energy Soil and Water analysis for Biomass Production: Soil Sampling from a
resource assessment; Small hydro resource assessment; Geothermal plot/field and soil analysis for its texture, pH. EC. C.N.P and K, Water
and other resources. analysis: TDS, Alkalinity, Total Hardness, EC and pH.
Soil Microflora and Root Association: Isolation and culturing of
RDL730 Technology Alternatives for Rural Development nitrogen fixers (Rhizobium. Azotobacter, Azospirillum and blue
green algae). ecto and endomycorrhizal fungi, Measurement of total
3 Credits (3-0-0)
microbial biomass in soil and respiration rate of microbes. Bacterial
Concept of technologies appropriate for Rural India. Social, economic and fungal root infection.
and environmental considerations. Appropriate technology for energy,
Biomass Production and Recycling: Microprilpaqation and other
agriculture, housing, textiles, water-supply and sanitation, health
vegetative techniques for biomass production. Seed treatment. Seed
care, transport and small-scale industries. An integrated approach
germination and nursery raising. Vermiculturing and Vermicomposting,
to the use of alternate technologies. lssues of technology transfer.
mushroom culturing and spawn production, silkworm rearing.
Bioinoculants for rapid composting.
RDL735 Anaerobic Digestion and Biogas Energy
Compost Analysis: C.N.P.K. cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, humus
Systems
and its fractions. Physicochemical properties of biomass.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Biomass and biomass energy conversion processes. Fundamental RDL760 Food Quality and Safety
of anaerobic digestion process and parametric requirements. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Characteristics of biomass material for anaerobic digestion Concept of Holistic Health, Holistic Food, Food Quality & Safety. Food
process. Biogas plant designing and matching of fuel application. quality parameters and standards, (Natural and chemical preservatives
Understanding fuel properties of biogas. Biogas purification processes & colours, toxins, pesticides, pathogens etc. Nutrients (macro and
and compression for storage. Utilization of biogas for thermal, power micro), shelf Life, seasonal food and diversity 'satvik’ characteristics),
generation and vehicular applications. Energy and emission analysis. Food processing industries-Current Status and Policy guidelines, Multi
340

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Rural Development and Technology
residue analysis and mycotoxin contamination in food. Processing exposure models for engineered nanomaterials in a regulatory
techniques for enhancing bioavailability of micronutrients, Minimizing context. Decision support for international agreements regulating
pesticide residue and mycotoxins in food products, Organic food: nanomaterials. Good agricultural practices and safe handling
quality control and export potential, APEDA and IFOAM Certification techniques of nanoparticles for farmers and field workers. Ethics in
'BIS, MRL's under India conditions etc, Policy and regulatory safe Nanotechnology and Policy Education: some case studies with respect
guards, Food fortification and Nutraceuticals, Traditional as well as to Indian agriculture.
modern system, Botanical pesticides for stored grain protection,
Major storage pests and their life cycle, traditional system and RDL780 Rural Innovation & Entrepreneurship
their limitations, Traditional systems and their limitations (storage Credits: 3 (3-0-0)
structures, pest control measures etc.) Innovations, Village cluster
Introduction to Rural Innovation Ecosystem, Understanding the
Grain storage model for Rural Entrepreneurship, Enhancing shelf life
Rural Entrepreneurial Ecosystem, Frugal Innovations and Grassroots
of G-K products, grain flour, raw milk, fruits and vegetables, bamboo
Entrepreneurship, Challenges in Rural Innovation and Enterprise
shoot mushroom etc., Equipment’s & machinery for food processing
Development, Design Thinking & Cross-Cultural Learnings in Rural
and preservation small scale food outlets (vendors), SHG, WTP and
Entrepreneurship, Success Stories of Rural Enterprises, Strategy
quality control (case study).
Model, Sustainable Business Models.
RDL761 Value Chain in Agro-food processing
RDL801 Successful Grassroot Organisations
3 Credits (2-0-2) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Importance and current status food processing and post-harvest The Domain and Challenges of Agricultural and Rural Development,
management; techniques of post-harvest operations in agro-food Participatory Approaches to agricultural and Rural Development,
processing; packing and packing-house operations; science of Participatory approach in the irrigation sector, Learning process and
agricultural crop drying and dehydration; food packaging techniques; assisted-Self-Reliance, Initiation & Leadership, CASE STUDIES-Set I,
packaging standards and regulations; various methods of food storage The AMUL Dairy Cooperatives, The Grameen Bank Story: Rural Credit
(bulk and bag storage), food grain storage structures; handling and in Bangladesh, CASE STUDIES - Set II SEWA: Women in movement,
transportation of agro produce; food preservation techniques; cold The Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee, CASE STUDIES - Set
chain management; shelf life analysis; value addition; management III Participatory Watershed Development in Rajasthan, The self-
of by-and waste products in agro-food processing; quality Help Rural Water Supply Program in Malawi, CAMPFIRE Program:
control techniques for agro-foods; food quality analysis methods; Community- Based Wildlife Management, Management, Planning
international agreements on sanitary and phyto-sanitary measures; and Implementation, Technology and Training, Information as a
HACCB GMP, 1SO, CIP, FPO license, Codex standards, PFA standards; Management Tool, Utilization of External Resources, Dealing with
emerging trends in post-harvest technology and management; policy Government and Politics. Understanding Social Capita from experience
planning and legislations in food processing and management; supply of participation, Mapping &Measuring social Capita-Assessment
chain management; open innovation and stragtegic alliance in agro- of collective action, Understanding civil society as a continuum,
food processing; rural entrepreneurships and startups in agro-food Measuring empowerment at community & local level Analytical Issues,
processing. Strategies for strengthening organizations at the local level success &
Sustainability i Strategic Goals for planning & Management.
RDL770 Rural Value Chain and Technologies for Holistic
Development RDL803 Informatics and Rural Development
3 Credits (2-0-2) 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Comparison of unique anatomy of Indigenous cows and other Introduction to ICT and Elements of lCT Trends in Computing
ruminants. Introduction to Panchgavya and its significance in Indian & Telecommunication Technologies, User Devices, Transmission
perspective, comparison between different types of cattle. Panchgavya Technologies, Wireless Technologies, Emerging Trends and
production and its application in past and present India. Importance Convergence, ICT a Tool for Socio-Economic Development,
of Panchgavya in food, medicine, agriculture rural economy, grassroot Information Revolution and Information Society, Social informatics:
industrialization, environment, soil toxicity and pollution. Importance ICT & RD, Impact of ICT for Development & Critique, ICT a Tool
of Panchgavya in view of climate change: greener fuel, green farming, for Rural Empowerment, Techniques for Access to Technology, ICT
non-toxic soil, etc. Social and economic impacts of Panchgavya in Agriculture, ICT for Rural Market, ICT in Dairy Mgmt, ICT & GIS,
farming, biochemical and molecular understanding of different e-Government and Rural Development, What is e-Government and
types of cattle milk products, critical control points of Pachgavya e-Governance, Trends in e-Government, Application of e-Gov for
processing for different applications. Cost of technology development Service Delivery Access to Information, Grievance Radressal, Some
for Panchgavya products and adoption, developing low cost and small Cases of e-Governance for RD, Implementation of ICT in Rural context,
scale Panchgavya products, Planning, developing and sustaining Software project management approach, l',1odels of implementation,
Panchgavya based rural startups, risk assessment and management Rural Needs Assessment, People first approach to rural informatics,
value chain development of Panchgavya products. Citizen participation in Design of rural informatics, Role of Community
based organisations, Challenges to rural informatics, digital divide,
RDL771 Nanotechnology for Safe and Sustainable Gender and other marginalised groups in information society Issues in
Agriculture use of ICT for RD, Critical success factors for e-Gov in Rural Context,
Global scenarios and national policies, international organization,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
regulatory interventions in computing and telecom industry Cyberlaws
Overview of technology application in agriculture. Brief about
& IT act of India.
emerging contaminants in agriculture. Introduction to nanotechnology
and its potential application in safe agriculture, soil and water quality.
RDL807 Women, Technology and Development
Engineered and green nanoparticles and their synthesis role in crop
3 Credits (2-0-2)
management. Agri- biomass and Panchgavya based synthesis of green
nanoparticles. Safe methods of green synthesis of nanofertilizers and Role of women in development, Gender bias and indicators, Strategies
their application in soil conditioning and biotic stress management. for women empowerment, Technology and Women uplift, Women and
Parameters to evaluate nanotoxicity in food chain. Environmental energy, Women and water management, Women and health care,
exposure models for nanomaterials in a regulatory context. Making Women and holistic health, Women and Vector control, Women in
nanotechnology in agricultural application safer by design. Life cycle farm sector, Women in non-farm sector, Women in the service sector;
assessment (LCA), risk assessment (RA) and substance flow analysis Women and information technology.
(SFA) of nanomaterials in agriculture Evaluation of environmental Field projects related to Women, Technology and Development.
341

Centre for Sensors, Instrumentation and Cyber-physical
Systems Engineering
DSL601 Electronic Components and Circuits (for • Experiments in Heat Conduction/ Convection. And Heat Sink
students other than Electrical/Electronics/Electronics Characterisation
and Communication) • Data conversion, ADC & DAC, synchronous detectors, multipliers,
3 Credits (3-0-0) dividers, instrumentation amplifiers
Review of Electronic Components: Passive Components, Active • Microprocessor/Microcontroller based system design with emphasis
Components including components used in Industrial Environment. on real world interfacing
Electronic Circuits: Choppers, Clampers, analog circuits, precision • Experiments on precision measurement methods and metrology.
and instrumentation amplifiers, signal conditioning circuits, industrial
electronic circuits. Nonlinear devices and circuits, computing circuits DSp705 Advanced Instrument Technology Lab
and waveform generators. Analog-Digital circuits: A/D and D/A 3 Credits (0-0-6)
converters, classification and characteristic parameters of DAC’s and
Experiments on design, simulation and verification of instrumentation
ADC’s. Testing criteria. Multiplying DAC’s. Digital Electronics: Logic
sub-systems addressing the following objectives:
gates, Combinational logic design, Sequential logic design, Counters;
the performance of practical transducer systems and their processing
Memory Devices, SRAM, DRAM, ROM, EPROM, Flash Memories
circuits dealing with other devices and circuital noise validation of
and Programmable Gate Arrays. Microprocessors: 8 bit and 16 bit
algorithms for information extraction from sensor signatures dynamic
microprocessor, basic structure and programming. Application of
range, threshold and sensitivity characterization and response time
microprocessors in instruments. Introduction to micro-controllers
evaluation in practical environments.
and embedded systems.
Experiments based on Digital Signal Processing hardware and
DSL603 Material and Mechanical Design (for software to: Study of DSP architecture; Interfacing with peripheral
students from Electrical/Electronics/Electronics and components; Implementation of DSP algorithm; Experiments based
communication) on Talbot effect, Digital Speckle Pattern Interferometry and Shack
3 Credits (3-0-0) Hartmann Sensor.
Basics of Design: Stresses, strain, hardness, toughness, visco-
DSL711 Sensors and Transducers
elasticity, torision, bending, deflection of beams, combined stresses,
energy methods. Material: metals and their alloys, heat treatment, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
polymers, composites, ceramics etc. Design of machine elements: Transducer Fundamentals: Transducer terminology Design and
Failure theories for static and alternating loadings. Design of shafts, performance characteristics, --- criteria for transducer selection, Case
fasteners, springs, curved beams, thick and thin vessels, gears etc; Studies – Transducers principles of representative cases with emphasis
Lubrication, journal bearings and rolling contact bearings, limits, on special “Electronic Conditioning requirements” of different type
fits and tolerances. Deflection of thin plates. Design of mechanical of sensors-- Resistive transducer; Inductive transducers; capacitive
elements for strain gage and other instrumentation applications. transducers; piezoelectric transducer; semiconductor and other
Introduction to vibrations and its isolation. Mechanical Fabrication sensing structures. Displacement transducers; tachometers and
techniques used in instruments. Basic mechanical fabrication velocity transducers; accelerometers and gyros; strain gauges; force
processes. Design and drawing sessions. and torque transducers; flow meters and level sensors; pressure
transducers; sound and ultrasonic transducer. Phototubes and
DSp703 Instrument Technology Laboratory 1 photodiodes; photovoltaic and photoconductive cells, photoemission,
3 Credits (0-0-6) photo electromagnetic, detectors pressure actuated photoelectric
The laboratory essentially supports the courses taught in the first detectors, design and operation of optical detectors, detector
semester courses. It consists of experiments on:- characteristics.
Study of packaging and characterization of transducers used for Brief Introduction -- Smart Intelligent Sensors, MEMS, Nano.
measurement of different physical variables like displacement,
Transducer Performance: Static and dynamic performance parameters
temperature, pressure, strain, flow etc.; Study of practical signal
Standards: Electrical tests, measurement unit, measurement
conditioning techniques and electronic measurement methods;
standards of of voltage, current, frequency, impedance etc .
Study of Electronic subsystems used in instruments Experiments
on Cardinal points measurements using Nodal slide method, Errors and noise: types of errors, Effect of noise and errors on
Measurement of wedge angle of optical flat and right angle of a resolution and threshold. Dynamic range.
prism by Autocollimation, Measurement the long radius of curvature Testing: Calibration, dynamic tests, environmental test, life test.
of concave mirror using Foucault Knife edge test and Ronchi test, Case Studies in Application of transducers: displacement, velocity,
Newton and Fizeau Interferometer for Testing of optical surface,
acceleration, force, stress, strain, pressure and temperature
Quantitative testing of optical elements using polarisation based
measurement. Angular and linear encoders, Radar, laser and sonar
Twyman-Green interferometer, Measurement of small radius of
distance measurement, Tachometers, Viscometer, densitometer.
curvature of lens using “Optical Spherometer”, Moire interferometry
for displacement measurement. DSL712 Electronic Techniques for Signal Conditioning
and Interfacing
DSp704 Instrument Technology Laboratory 2
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Review of Network theory, transmission lines and Circuit parameters (Z
The laboratory supports the subjects taught in the second semester Y Hybrid, etc) and introduction to HF Design and S parameters Analog
courses. The laboratory consists experiments on: signal conditioning, Ultra- precision conditioning, Gain; attenuation;
Study of various techniques used for analog and digital conditioning input and output impedances; single ended and differential signals;
of signals from various transducers/ detectors; Study on modulation/ CMRR; system-module interfacing consideration; measurement
demodulation techniques, noise generation and measurement, Study and characterization of electronic system modules. Analog and
of testing and calibration methods of instruments. The structure of digital System Co-housing: EMI effects and EMC measures; circuit
experiments has been designed to impart design level familiarity with card placement; shielding and grounding techniques; ground loop
various subsystems of instrumentation set up. The subsystems may management; isolation and interference filtering. EMI hardening and
consist of a detector-transducer, signal conditioner, a level power EMC interfacing. Analog and digital data transmission; modulation &
amplifier, display, actuator/final control element. The study will demodulation; Data transmission; channel noise and noise immunity
generally focus attention on one of the subsystems. In electronics factors. Data busses; GPIB and other standards in parallel data
conditioning. Specific Case Study Experiments as below: transmission. Opto-electronic interfacing techniques. Analog and
• Experiments in Control involving speed, position, temperature digital representation of data; comparisons and relative merits;
controls using MATLAB multiplexing and demultiplexing of analog and digital data, ADC/DAC.
342

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Centre for Sensors, Instrumentation and Cyber-Physical Systems Engineering
Microcontroller and DSP applications. Application of CPU’s in signal DSL734 Laser Based Instrumentation
and data handling; response linearization and drift compensation; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
data logger, computer aided measurement and control.
Radiation and matter interaction and fundamental of LASER action.
The LASER and it’s properties. Laser systems - gas and semiconductor
DSL714 Instrument Design and Simulations
LASERS. LASER beam optics and propagation of LASER beams.
3 Credits (2-0-2) Fundamentals of holography - basic theory of holography, recording
Review of circuit analysis and design. Review of signals and systems medium and type of holograms for display purposes. Applications
in time and frequency domain: Fourier and Laplace Transforms, of holography in metrology - Holographic Interferometry, double
response plots. Dynamic properties of instrument systems: Review of exposure, time averaged and real time holographic interferometry.
instrument control systems, on-off, proportional and PID controllers. Laser speckles and laser speckles techniques. Digital speckle pattern
Stability considerations, gain and phase margin. Use of pulse and interferometry (DSPI) and digital holographic interferometry (DHI)
harmonic test signals for performance evaluation. Linear modelling in measurements of displacement, refractive index, temperature,
of instrument systems. Models for basic instrument building blocks. shape, vibration and material properties. Two wavelength and
Simulation studies of circuit blocks. Simulation studies of circuits, phase-shifting interferometry. Laser based temperature measurement
instrument modules, transducers and control schemes using PSPICE techniques. Collimation testing and laser based alignment systems.
and MATLAB expert simulation software. Laser based techniques for low frequency and high frequency
vibration measurements. Talbot interferometry and its applications in
DSS720 Independent Study scientific and industrial measurements. Shearing interferometry and
3 Credits (0-3-0) its applications in scientific and industrial measurements. Sensing
of high currents on high voltage lines using magneto optic effect.
DSL722 precision Measurement Systems DSL737 Display Devices and Technology
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Fundamentals of precision measurements: accuracy, precision, Human vision. Basics of luminescence, fluorescence, and
resolution, repeatability, reproducibility, consistency, drift analysis, phosphorescence. Display materials and their characterization.
dynamic range, Measurements and error estimation, systematic and Emissive displays: Review of cathode ray tube (CRT) displays. Plasma
random errors, Instrument transfer function, least square method display devices and technologies, field-emissive, electro-chromic and
and its applications, filtering, polynomial fitting, data analysis and photo-chromic displays. Inorganic, organic and polymeric LED based
statistical inference, correlation, Surface roughness, waviness and display devices: Device physics, materials, fabrication processes,
shape measurements, Study of some measurement systems such structures, and drive circuits. Electro-optical characterization of LEDs.
as mechanical and optical profilers, circularity, cylindricity and Transparent thin film (TFTs) displays, electronics, and manufacturing
conicity measurement systems, Co-ordinate measuring machine, technologies and applications.
profile projector, long trace slope measuring profilometer, Shack- Non-emissive displays: basics of liquid-crystal materials, their properties
Hartmann sensor for slope measurement, Different Interferometers and characterization. Liquid-crystal display devices and technologies.
for optical metrology, absolute testing techniques, Moire techniques Transmissive, reflective, active and passive matrix, thin-film transistor
for measurements in industrial applications. (TFT), transreflective, and back lighting technologies for LCDs.
Electronic-ink, electronic paper, and flexible and transparent display
DSL731 Optical Components and Basic Instruments
technologies and their applications. Laser based projection displays
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Display electronics and digital light processing technologies. Three-
Generation of light: Thermal, non-thermal and semiconductor light dimensional (3-D) imaging and display technologies: Micro-displays,
sources. Measurement of light and instrumentation, Properties and STEREOSCOPIC 3D displays. HOLOGRAPHIC 3-D displays. Laser
propagation of light; The Ray Optics, Wave Optics, and Electromagnetic based 3D-TV.
Optics; Basics of interference, diffraction and polarization of light.
Optical Components: Reflecting components, plane, Spherical, DSL740 Instrument Organization and Ergonomics
paraboloidal, total internal reflection. Refracting components; 3 Credits (2-0-2)
Converging, diverging and combination of lenses, Design analysis and Functions of instrument systems, classification of tasks as man-
image formation by lenses, Wavefront aberrations; Monochromatic machine systems, need analysis, product specifications, solutions
(Seidel), and chromatic aberrations. Eyepices: Huygens, Ramsden, search, product planning, systems break-up. Strengths and
and special eyepieces; Prisms, Polarizing prisms: Glan Taylor Polarizer, weaknesses of the machines. Understanding the potentials and
Glan- Thomson prism polarizer, Rochon Prism Polarizer, Senarmont weaknesses of the human beings, application of force, load lifting,
prism polarizer, Wollaston Prism, Phase plates (λ/2, λ/4), Soleil – load carrying, stride patterns. Functions of controls and displays,
Babinet compensator, Diffracting components; diffraction by single/ handles, levers, knobs, switches, dials, LCD screens. Hand-
multiple/openings, types of gratings and fabrication techniques, held devices, workstations, large control systems. Identification
diffractive optical elements. Polarizing components; Polarization of constraints emerging from scientific, technical, production,
by reflection, and double refraction, birefringence crystals, and environmental and maintenance considerations. Aesthetics of color,
polarization based optical devices, Rotatory Polarization, Polarization form and graphics. Value engineering. Design of manuals, job-aids
rotators; Optical instruments: Microscopes, Telescopes, cystoscope; and training aids. Case studies, Exercises & Projects.
Refracting, reflecting, interferometric telescopes. Interferometers;
two- beam, multiple-beam, and shearing interferometers; Detectors: DSL742 Integrated Quantum photonics
Photodetectors, CCD and CMOS detectors, IR-detectors. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Basics of quantum mechanics, superposition, qubits, entanglement;
DSL733 Optical Materials and Optical Techniques in
Different physical systems for implementing quantum protocols –
Instrumentation
photons, atoms, superconducting qubits, etc. and their comparison;
3 Credits (2-0-2) Photons and their properties for encoding quantum information and
Optical materials: Optical and mechanical characteristics of optical applications in computation, communication and simulations; Different
glass, metal optics, plastic optics and optical crystals, Manufacturing of integrated photonics platforms and their comparison for quantum
optics on optical glass and plastics, Injection molding of plastic optics, information tasks; Devices for generation photon qubits using non-
Single point diamond turning and CNC milling and micromachining, linear optical processes; Solid state photon emitters; Devices for
replication techniques. Photo-Lithography and its optical system, manipulation of quantum states of light using linear optical circuits;
Illumination and projection systems, Astronomical and remote Implementation of quantum gates using optics; Detectors for inferring
sensing systems, detectors: Thermal detectors, photon detectors quantum properties, superconducting detectors; Quantum sensing
and Imaging detectors. using photos.
343

Centre for Sensors, Instrumentation and Cyber-Physical Systems Engineering Courses of Study 2024-2025
DSL750 Opto-electronic Detectors and Image Sensors 3. Data Management: Acquisition and analytics, throughput vs.
3 Credits (3-0-0) speed, compressive sensing, calibration procedures, validation.
Various signals/Image/video processing techniques for detection
Fundamentals of opto-electronic image sensors, Physics, device
and classification.
fabrication, electronic circuits, noise sources and signal processing
of: Photo detectors based on PMT, MCP : UV-Visible photo detectors,
DSD801 Major project part-I
VIS-NIR Photo detectors, IR-FIR detectors, THz-detectors, Charged
coupled Devices (CCD) based image sensors. Complementary Metal 6 Credits (0-0-12)
Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) based image sensors. Thermal imaging
camera and sensor technology, FLIR, FPA, Single photon detectors DSD802 Major project part-I
and quantum detectors, Ultra-high speed photo-detectors: TCSPC, 12 Credits (0-0-24)
Ultra-high speed electronic streak camera, Ultra-high speed Framing
camera, Electronic circuitry for ultra-high speed camera technology,
DSL811 Selected Topics in Instrumentation-I
Signal and image processing tools and techniques.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
DSL 755 Sensing and Imaging Techniques Advanced course on Selected Topics in Instrumentation to the M.Tech.
Instrument Technology Programme.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course deals with multidisciplinary aspects of various sensing
DSC812 Term paper and Seminar
and imaging techniques and their applications in engineering and
medicine. 3 Credits (0-3-0)
1. Bio-Medical Sensing and Imaging Systems: Introduction to
different imaging methodologies, Physics of various methods used DSL814 Selected Topics in Instrumentation-II
in diagnostics, Properties of clinical samples and their handling 3 Credits (3-0-0)
mechanisms, Point of Care (PoC) diagnostic techniques and their Advanced course on Selected Topics in Instrumentation to the M.Tech.
working principles. Instrument Technology Programme.
2. Sensing and Imaging Systems for Industrial quality
control: Acoustic, radiographic, infrared, and optical imaging and DSL815 Special Topics in Instrumentation
sensing modalities for industrial process monitoring. 1 Credit (1-0-0)
344

Transportation Research and Injury prevention Centre
TRL700 Mathematical Methods in Road Safety of natural experiments, quasi-experimental methods, interrupted
4 Credits (3-0-2) time series, count models, capture-recapture, and population-based
survey methods.
The course will provide the students with basics of real analysis,
calculus, linear algebra, optimization, probability, statistics and
TRV75X Net Zero Transportation
regression techniques to learn advanced road safety concepts. There
will be applications of these mathematical techniques in road transport 1 Credit (1-0-0)
and safety research. Basics of net zero transportation, transport sector and carbon
emissions, emissions from various modes of transport (goods and
TRL701 Transportation Safety and Injury prevention
passenger vehicles); Decarbonizing the transportation sector (low-or
principles zero-carbon modes – electric vehicles, active travel, solutions and
4 Credits (3-0-2) non-motorized vehicle); Clean fuels, technology, vehicle efficiency,
The course will provide the students with basics of transport and modal optimization, alternative energy strategies and transport
traffic safety as a public health issue; systems understanding of behaviour to achieve net-Zero carbon emissions; Regulations, green
road transport; traffic crash and travel data sources, methods for business, and transportation policies for economic development and
modelling travel behaviour choices and the four step transport model; environmental sustainability.
specific safety requirements for pedestrians, bicyclists, motorised two
wheelers, public transport users and car users; planning and design TRV761 The Engineer’s Role Advocating For Hill Road
requirements or safe highways and rural roads; methods of costing Safety
road traffic crashes, Review of Mechanics, Newton’s laws, Inertia, 1.0 Credits (1-0-0)
stress-strain, energy, impact; Mathematical modelling in biomechanics We will explore how one can advocate for safe road systems,
and injury prevention, Lumped mass, multi body, FE and integrated with particular attention to hill roads. Participants are expected to
computational models(3);Tissue and Human body Biomechanics, read assigned texts closely before coming to class, present their
Mechanisms of injury, injury indices; Crashworthiness standards- understanding and analysis of the material in class, and engage in
crash tests and crash simulations, Use of Human Body Surrogates discussion on the same. The topics covered will be: administrative
and Models for Testing / analysis, Vehicle structures for crash energy rules, road safety regulations, and corresponding legislation.
management; Vehicle occupant/restraint system analysis ; Pedestrian
crashes and safety; Helmet Design.
TRV762 Sustainable and Resilient Hill-Road
TRL702 Transport and health Infrastructure
3 Credits (3-0-0) 1.0 Credits (1-0-0)
Noise, air pollution, physical activity, and traffic injuries; estimation of The goal of this class is to look at large-scale infrastructure that
traffic emissions inventory; health impact assessment; comparative fosters long-term environmental sustainability and anticipates
risk assessment; population exposure; health burden; road, rail and extreme climate events brought on by our changing climate. We will
air transportation; electric vehicles; disability adjusted life-years examine methods, materials, processes, technologies, practices, and
(DALYs); travel surveys and travel patterns; age and gender variation; operations which play a part in making infrastructure sustainable
metabolic equivalent of tasks; relative risks; dose-response functions; and resilient. We will attempt to keep hill roads at the center of
epidemiology; health surveillance our attention. We will also discuss related issues of energy, water,
transportation, communication, natural resources and ecology.
TRV751 Transformation of the Transport System and
TRV763 Hill Road Safety-Crash Barrier Systems
Cities for a Sustainable Future
1.0 Credits (1-0-0)
1 Credits (1-0-0)
Introduction to IRC guidelines for hill road safety; crash barrier
Course contents divided in three parts: 1) Critique of the existing
systems; comparing and selecting appropriate crash barrier system
transport system, 2) Appraisal of Contradictions, 3) What does plan
for a hill road; installation and maintenance of crash barriers.
for a sustainable future have to achieve?
TRL851 Special Topics in Mobility and Traffic Safety
TRV754 Epidemiology Methods in Traffic Injury
prevention 3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credits (1-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): These will be decided on a case-by-case basis
The course includes introduction to traffic injury data and at the time of floating the courses
epidemiology; case-control and case-crossover methods, evaluation State-of-the art understanding of the topics and research challenges.
334455

Amar Nath and Shashi Khosla School of Information Technology
SIL761 Introduction to Information and Communication and tools will be detailed. Writing assignments, creative thinking,
Technologies for Development and interactive discussions will form an integral part of this course.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
SIV851 Special Module on eGovernance
This course will focus on the following topics: what is social
1 Credit (1-0-0)
development, introduction to social development initiatives, example
of ICTs applied in social development, successes and failures, theories The contents will attempt to expose students with recent
on ICTs leading to development, best practices, cases studies, and developements on different aspects of e-governance. Specific
evaluation methods. A perspective throughout will be on things to coverage will vary with each offering and may focus on some particular
keep in mind when building ICTs for development, than interpreting aspects of e-governance and related issues and accordingly may
various initiatives. include appropriate project work and/or case studies as per the
emphasis laid out in that offering.
SIL763 Introduction to Blockchains, Cryptocurrencies,
and Smart Contracts SIL861 Special Topics in ICTD
4 Credits (3-0-2) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
This course will focus on the motivation for blockchains, This course will focus on state-of-the-art and research problems of
cryptocurrencies, and smart contracts; ingredients of blockchains importance in ICTD area.
– P2P networking and cryptographic primitives; Bitcoin blockchain
structure; blockchain consensus protocols; mining strategies and SIV861 Information and Comm Technologies for
attacks; anonymity and traceability; scalability solutions – sharding, Development
segregated witness, Lightening network; Ethereum, smart contracts
1 Credit (1-0-0)
and blockchain as a service; Emerging applications of blockchain.
Notion of appropriate technology; case studies of ICTD projects
SIL765 Networks & System Security such as KioskNet, WiLDNet (Wireless Long Distance Networks), AIR
(Advanced Interactive Radio), Spoken Web, GRINS (Gramin Radio
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Inter Networking System), Digital Green; design principles to be kept
The goal of this course is to introduce challenges in securing
in mind; evaluation methodologies.
computer systems and networks. We will discuss various types
of vulnerabilities in existing software interfaces, such as buffer
SIV864 Special Module on Media processing &
overflows, unsafe libc functions, filesystem design issues, etc. We will
Communication
also discuss modern-day defenses against attacks exploiting these
vulnerabilities. In network security, we will discuss security problems 1 Credit (1-0-0)
in network protocols and routing, such as sniffing, denial of service, Communication today has rich multimedia contents. Under the varying
viruses, worms, etc. and defenses against them. The course will bandwidth attention is required for appropriate processing of the
involve reading research papers on relevant topics, programming media contents satisfying desired quality of service. This course will
assignments, and projects. focus on bringing the two broad areas of multimedia processing and
communication together. In media processing fundamental concepts
SIL769 Internet Traffic -Measurement, Modeling &
of media processing and compression will be introduced with exposure
Analysis to current techniques and standards. In communication protocols and
4 Credits (3-0-2) algorithms for both wired and wireless networks will be discussed in
Internet architecture: overview of TCP/IP protocol stack. Mathematics relation to multimedia communication.
for studying the Internet: Review of basic probability and statistics,
SIV871 Special Module in Computational Neuroscience
analytic modeling approaches. Practical issues in Internet
Measurements: Challenges, tools and techniques for measuring 1 Credit (1-0-0)
performance. Internet Traffic Characterization: Poisson models for Special module that focuses on research problems of importance in
Internet traffic, self-similarity in network traffic. Web Performance: this area of Neuroscience from a computational perspective. Specific
workload characterization, caching, content distribution networks. coverage will vary with each offering, and may include project work
Multimedia Systems: Video-on-Demand, IP-TV, Peer-to-Peer file and design / case studies. Topics for each offering of the course will
sharing, Peer-to-Peer Streaming. Social Networks. Network Security. be separately listed.
SIL801 Special Topics in Multimedia System
SID880 Minor project in Information Technology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
Content of this course, depending upon the teacher, will be focused
on some aspect(s) of multimedia systems like content based retrieval,
SIV889 Special Module in Human Computer Interface
multimedia communication, compression techniques, speech and
1 Credit (1-0-0)
audio technology, etc.
Special module that focuses on research problems of importance
SIL802 Special Topics in Web Based Computing in this area from a computational and design perspective. Specific
3 Credits (3-0-0) coverage will vary with each offering, and may include project work
Content of this course, depending upon the teacher, will be focused and design / case studies. Topics for each offering of the course will
on some aspect(s) of web based computing like sematic web, web be separately listed.
based distributed computing, search methods, etc.
SID890 Major project (SIY)
SIV813 Applications of Computer in Medicines 36 Credits (0-0-72)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
SIV895 Special Module on Intelligent Information
This course will consist of 14 lecture-hours that focus on information
processing
and communication technologies (ICT) that are being developed
and used in medical education and clinical practice today. Various 1 Credit (1-0-0)
technologies ranging from computer aided instruction (CAI), This course will focus on presenting conclave of methods which
simulations, and networked applications at one end to electronic are being practiced for intelligent computing – learning techniques,
medical records (EMR), telemedicine, and robotic surgery at the classification methods, embedding intelligence, neural networks, soft
other end will be described. The process of research, development, computing and evolutionally methods. Emphasis will also be given
and evaluation in the designing and making of these applications on the variety of multidisciplinary applications of such techniques.
346

Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence
AIL701 Mathematics Behind Machine Learning AIL712 Multivariate Statistical Methods
3 Credits (3-0-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Overlaps with: MTL101, MTL104, MTL103, MTL106, MTL108, Pre-requisite(s): AIL701
MTL265, MTL502, MTL508, MTL601, MTL628, MCL261, Overlaps with: MTL712
MCL761, ELL701, ELL780, COL756, MSL719
Introduction to multivariate data, geometry of a sample, Mahalanobis
Vector space, dimension, basis, matrix rank & nullity, system of linear distance, mean and covariance, generalized variance, vector block
equations, eigenvalues and properties for some special matrices, distribution, linear combination of variables, multivariate Gaussian
diagonalization. Normed linear space, matrix norm, closed sets, distribution and its properties, some tests of multivariate normality
sequence, convergence, Banach space, Hahn Banach Theorem (like Mardia test, Shapiro-Wilk test, Henze-Zirkler test), sampling
(without proof), Inner product space, orthonormal basis, Gram distribution and large sample behavior of mean and covariance,
Schmidt process, Hilbert space, adjoint operator, SVD. Nonlinear Wishart distribution inference about mean vector, Hotelling’s T-square
programming, linearizing cone, KKT optimality, convex function and likelihood ratio test, confidence region.
and its properties, Lagrange function, Lagrange dual. Steepest
Comparison of several multivariate populations, MANOVA, multivariate
decent method for unconstrained problem, momentum gradient and
linear regression, inferences about regression models and parameters,
stochastic gradient method, empirical risk, shattering, VC dimension,
model checking, principal component analysis, factor analysis,
Mercer theorem, reproducing Kernel. Probability, Bayes theorem, pdf
orthogonal factor models, factor rotation, strategy for factor analysis,
and cdf, moment generating function, some discrete and continuous
canonical correlation analysis, interpreting population by canonical
distributions, transformation of variables, t-test, chi-square test,
variables, large sample inferences.
F-test, random sampling, central limit theorem, maximum likelihood
estimator, hypothesis testing (without proof but the concept building)
AIL721 Deep Learning
4 Credits (3-0-2)
AIp701 Machine Learning Lab
Pre-requisite(s): Any one of ELL409 / ELL784 / AIL701 / COL774
1 Credit (0-0-2)
/ COL 341
About one third of the course will be devoted to programming aspects.
One third would be devoted to assignments and experiments, and Overlaps with: COL775 approx. 80%. APL745 approx. 40%.
one third to a term project. [COL341, COL774, ELL409, ELL784] < 15%
Refresher on fundamentals of python programming. Implementation Introduction to representation learning, limitations of classical ML
of linear models (linear, logistic and polynomial regressors) from methods Introduction to DNN Universal approximation theorem,
scratch without using libraries, implementation of naive Bayes, mathematical foundations and introduction to deep architectures,
verification of perceptron convergence algorithm, validation of Activation functions, Learning DNN, gradient descent, Computational
different regularization techniques, generation of biasvariance curves; Graphs and Back Propagation, Regularization - Bias-Variance trade-
Kernel machines - Experiments with hyperparameters, effect of kernel off, Norm-penalty Early stopping Regularization: Bagging, Boosting,
functions, margins. Implementation and study of classification and Ada-boost, Dropout, Batch Norm and other regularization techniques
regression trees, back-propagation, dropout, batch normalization; Optimization algorithms – SGD, Momentum, RMSProp, Adaptive
study of choice of loss functions on deep neural network performance. gradient algorithms (ADAgrad, ADAM etc.) Convolutional Neural
Implementations of a CNN, GRU on image and sequential tasks. Networks (CNNs), Architectures few applications such as Object
ML on edge - Implementation and optimization of algorithms on Localization Detection and Segmentation, Action Classification,
edge hardware such as FPGA. Term project - Proposing, solving and sequential Models, BPTI, Problems with Recurrent neural Networks
implementing a real-world ML problem. (RNNs), Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) / Gated Recurrent Units
(GRUs), Bidirectional LSTMs (BLTSMs), Applications of RNNs to
NLP, Language Model Unsupervised representational learning Auto
AID710 Mini Project in Artificial Intelligence Encoders and its variants, Variational inference and Deep learning:
3 Credits (0-0-6) Variational Auto Encoders (VAE) and its variants, Generative
Adversarial Networks Graph Convolutional networks (GCNs), Graph
Pre-requisite(s): EC75
Attention Networks (GATs), Deep Reinforcement Learning, Advanced
Specific reading materials and other content will depend on the needs
Topics: Fairness and Explainability in DL Adversarial Learning Neuro-
and interests of individual students.
Symbolic Reasoning, Neural Architecture Search.
AIS710 Independent Study in Artificial Intelligence AIL722 Reinforcement Learning
3 Credits (0-3-0) 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC75 Pre-requisite(s): Any one of ELL409 / ELL784 / AIL701 / AIL721
Specific reading materials and other content will depend on the needs / COL 341 / COL774
and interests of individual students. Overlaps with: ELL729 approx. 50 %. [COL 333, COL341,
COL770, COL774, ELL409, ELL 784, ELL802, ELL888) < 10%
AIL711 Numerical Optimization Introduction and Basics of RL, Markov Decision Processes (MDPs),
3 Credits (3-0-0) Dynamic Programming, Monte Carlo Methods (Prediction), Temporal
difference Methods (Prediction), Monte Carlo, TD Method (Control),
Pre-requisite(s): AIL701
Monte Carlo, TD Method (Control - cont.), N-step TD, EligibiJity
Overlaps with: MTL704, CLL782 Traces, Model based RL, (Action-)Value Function Approximation, Value
General properties of algorithm, global convergence, rate of Function Approximation, Policy Gradient, Policy Gradient, Misc. Topics.
convergence, unconstrained optimization techniques - one
dimensional methods: Fibonacci method, Golden section method, AIL723 Graph Machine Learning
interpolation. Multi-dimensional methods: pattern search method, 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Nelder and Meed method, gradient based methods: steepest
Pre-requisite(s): ELL780 / ELL409 / ELL784 / AIL701 / COL774
descent method and its variants recall, conjugate direction and
/ COL341
gradient method, quasi-Newton method. Constrained optimization
techniques - penalty method, barrier method, projection gradient Introduction and Motivations for Machine Learning with Graphs, Graph
method, sequential quadratic programming approach. Semidefinite and its Matrices, Graph Theory, Laplacian Matrix and Smoothness,
and cone programming Graph Learning from Data, Graph Embedding, Label Propagation,
347

Yardi School of Artificial Intelligence Courses of Study 2024-2025
Manifold Regularization, semi-, un-, and supervised Learning with The elements of statistical learning theory, Probabilistic inequalities,
Graphs, Graph Data Mining, Deep Learning with Graphs. Tikhonov-type regularization, general regularization, Representer
theorem, Convergence analysis of empirical risk minimization,
AIL741 Querying and Mining Graph Data Adaptive regularization parameter choice rules.
4 Credits (3-0-2) Approximation by trigonometric polynomials, Localized kernel
approximations, Neural Networks, RBF neural networks, universal
Pre-requisite(s): COL761 or with instructor’s permission
approximation, Convergence analysis of neural networks, Deep vs
Graph Structural properties; Basics of Spectral graph theory and Shallow, stochastic gradient algorithms, Generative modeling.
random walks on graphs; Random graph models; Graph Generative
Models; Queries and Index structures for graphs; Graph clustering AIL821 Special Topics in Machine Learning
and community detection; Social Network Analysis; Graph Mining;
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Graph Neural Networks.
Pre-requisite(s): ELL409, ELL784, AIL701, COL774, AIL721
AIL742 Scalable Data Management for ML Recent advances in Deep learning, Reinforcement learning, and its
4 Credits (3-0-2) applications in the areas of Computer Vision, Speech processing,
Natural Language Processing etc.
Pre-requisite(s): COL106, MTL106 or with instructor’s
permission.
AIL841 Special Topics in Data Science
Sampling and sketching (reservoir sampling, counting samples, graph
3 Credits (3-0-0)
sampling, count-min sketches, Flajolet sketches, graph sketches,
heavy hitters, Johnson-Lindenstrauss lemma and dimensionality Pre-requisite(s): COL761, COL774, COL764, AIL741
reduction techniques); data integration (schema alignment, Recent advances in big-data management, applications of machine
information extraction, entity linkage, data fusion); data profiling learning to understand structured and unstructured data in large
and cleaning (rule-based data cleaning, outlier detection, data enterprises, human-centric analysis of large-data, spatio-temporal
transformations, probabilistic data cleaning); issues in building analytics, data cleaning and data integration using machine
large-scale machine learning models (noise and bias in data, model learning etc.
data management).
AIL861 Special Topics in AI Applications
AIL763 Artificial Intelligence for Earth Observation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Pre-requisite(s): One of COL761, COL774, COL333 or COL671
Pre-requisite(s): COL106 The course will focus on one or two of the specialized applications
Introduction to Earth observation data, challenges for Artificial of AI such as computational biology, genetics, healthcare, wellness,
Intelligence in Earth observation data analysis, different learning transportation systems, software development, hardware design,
paradigms, semantic segmentation of recommendation systems, music, etc. The course will discuss the
satellite images, change detection, aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty various AI techniques developed for problems in these domains.
in Earth observation data and models, deep learning model
explainability, deep learning for time-series data analysis, 3D CNN AIL862 Special Topics in Computer Vision
and application to hyperspectral images, multisensor and multi-modal 3 Credits (3-0-0)
adaptation and fusion, vision foundation and regression models for
Pre-requisite(s): One of COL774, or COL780, or ELL793
Earth observation applications.
The course will focus on few specialized applications of computer
Practical using relevant programming language and deep learning
vision such as mobility, transportation systems, healthcare, wellness,
library for multispectral and hyperspectral image classification, and
virtual and augmented reality, computational biology, genetics, etc.
multi-sensor analysis.
The course will discuss various computer vision techniques developed
AIL801 Introduction to the Mathematics of Machine for problems in these domains.
Learning
3 Credits (3-0-0) AIV790 Ethical Considerations in MINDS
Overlaps with: MTL801 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Review: Normed linear space, Banach space, Hilbert space, Pre-requisite(s): COL333, COL671, COL774, or with instructor’s
Orthonormal basis, Projection theorem, Dual spaces, Riesz permission.
representation theorem, Bounded linear operators, Compact Introduction to ethical issues in AI: bias, fairness, transparency,
operators, Spectral theorem for self-adjoint compact operators. reliability, accountability, job loss, privacy, human-aware AI. AI models
Reproducing Kernel Hilbert space (RKHS), Positive definite functions, to debias training data. Explainability in ML. Adversarial robustness.
Feature maps, Gaussian Kernel and their RKHSs, Mercer’s theorem, Federated learning.
348

Kusuma School of Biological Sciences
SBL100 Introductory Biology for Engineers phases of cellular growth; bacterial cell movement; mammalian cell
4 Credits (3-0-2) culture; chromosome staining in onion root tip cells and cell division;
Isolation of genomic DNA from multiple sources; restriction digestion
Darwinian evolution & molecular perspective; Introduction to
to identify patterns; PCR; human blood antigen identification.
phylogeny - Classification systems in biology and relationships;
Cellular assemblies – From single cell to multi-cellular organisms: SBV501 Intellectual property Rights in Biosciences
Geometry, Structure and Energetics; Comparing natural vs.
1 Credits (1-0-0)
humanmade machines; Infection, disease and evolution – synergy
and antagonism; Immunology – An example of permutations and Introduction to various forms of Intellectual Property Rights,
combinations in biology; Cancer biology – Control and regulation; biotechnology inventions- nature and scope, patent drafting and filing,
Stem cells – Degeneracy in biological systems; Engineering designs International Conventions, treaties and Laws related to IPRs and their
inspired by biology – Micro- to Macro- scales. impact on biotech industry, Technology Transfer, Agreements, Role of
IPRs as assets for Start-ups. The lectures will incorporate case studies.
Laboratory: Biosafety; Buffers in biology - Measuring microlitres,
Preparation of standard biological buffers, buffering capacity and pKa SBL510 Mathematical and Statistical Biology
of buffers, response of cells and plant tissues in different buffering
4 Credits (3-0-2)
conditions; Observing cell surface and intracellular contents using
light and fluorescence microscopy, measuring cellular motion using Overlaps with: MSL719, MTL108, MTL390, MTl601, MCL761,
real-time video microscopy; Measuring and visualizing intracellular MLL703, ASP731, BML737, BML738, HSL513, SPL708, BBL772
molecular components - Proteins and Genomic DNA.
Numerical aspects of biological data, columnar data presentation
in excel, data transformation, concept of number system, data
SBp200 Introduction to practical Modern Biology
presentation, data distribution, plots, measure of central tendency
2 Credits (0-0-4)
and dispersion, linear regression, error in data, error propagation,
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 probability, conditional probability, confidence intervals, significance
Biosafety lab practices – use of lab coats, gloves, safety goggles, tests, analysis of variance, statistical tests in R, data integrity, variables,
eye wash, shower, chemical and biological waste disposal; Buffers in functions, trigonometric, polynomial and exponential functions, 2-D
biology– Preparation of standard biological buffers, buffering capacity and 3-D coordinate geometry, solving linear equations simultaneously
and pKa of buffers, biomolecules such as enzymes, whole cells and by matrices, limits and derivatives of functions, ordinary differential
plant tissues in different buffering conditions; Observing cell surface equations, integral calculus, application of differential calculus in
and intracellular contents using light and fluorescence microscopy, biological problems. Laboratory: Data presentation in excel; curve
“autofluorescence” of cells, real-time video microscopy of motile cells, fitting; statistical analysis using R; Introduction to Linux shell and shell
cell growth and division; Plant genomic DNA isolation; Protoplast scripting; Programming with AWK; ASCII data handling and analysis;
isolation and viability; Computer Modeling-From Genome Sequence basics of database management with MySQL; Biological columnar
to Protein Sequence and structure to screening for a “Hit” Molecule. data as handling matrices in MATLAB, ODE solver and HMM analysis.
SBL201 High-Dimensional Biology SBL520 Biochemistry
3 Credits (3-0-0) 4 Credits (3-0-2)
Water and its physico-chemical properties that sustain life; structure,
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100
stereochemistry, function of biomolecules – proteins, carbohydrates,
Introduction to Genomics, Proteomics, Metabolomics & Cellomics;
fats, nucleic acids and coenzymes; biological membranes; methods in
Size vis-à-vis packaging and replication challenges; Biomolecular
detection and analysis of biomolecules; thermodynamics in biological
architecture and assemblies leading to function; Immortal cells
systems; enzymes – kinetics, inhibition; glucose metabolism and
and aging; Minimalist genomes & designer genomes; Molecular
energy production, electron transport chain, ATP as energy currency;
engines; Proteins as nanobiomachines; Network circuits for genome
Photosynthesis; Amino acid metabolism including urea cycle; fatty
organization and protein-protein interactions, date hubs, party hubs,
acid metabolism - beta oxidation; current topics in biochemistry
structure-function axioms; Biochemical cycles and feedback loops,
Laboratory: Separation of biomolecules like carbohydrates, fatty
Omics applications; Forensics; Drug targets.
acids, amino acids and nucleic acids; quantification of biomolecules by
spectroscopic methods; pH and pKa; enzyme activity under different
SBD301 Mini project
conditions; Vmax and KM measurement.
3 Credits (0-0-6)
SBL530 Biology of Microbes
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and EC 75
Systems Biology, Plant Molecular Biology, Bioprospecting, Tissue 4 Credits (3-0-2)
culture and Developmental Biology, Virology, Structural Biology, Lecture: Introduction to microbial physiology and structure –
Cell Biophysics, Cellular Signalling, Protein folding and misfolding, bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites etc.; Introduction to the immune
Computational Biology. system- cells, factors and mechanisms; molecular mechanisms in
pathogen-host interactions– adherence, virulence, signaling and
SBL500 Molecular Cell Biology & Genetics opportunistic infections; host response, suppression, modulation and
4.0 Credits (3-0-2) evasion; microbial diseases and their societal impact; transmission
of microbes - modes and rates of transmission; microbial evolution,
Lecture: Introduction to tools of Cell Biology; Architecture of
antigenic variations, host-switching and molecular epidemiology;
Prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; DNA, RNA and genetic code;
antimicrobial agents and resistance; principles of vaccination, herd
chromosomes and genome organisation- prokaryotes versus
immunity, implications on public health and biosafety; microbiome in
eukaryotes; Molecular basis of inheritance including Mendelian
health and disease; microbes in food and dairy industries; bioprocess
genetics and non-Mendelian genetics. Genetic linkage and mapping
engineering and technology; fermentation and pharmaceutical
in both bacteria and eukaryotes. DNA replication, mutations, DNA
microbiology.
repair and genetic recombination; Gene expression – transcription,
RNA processing, epigenetics and translation. Control of Evolution of Laboratory: Preparation of sterile culture media; isolation
genes and population genetics. Gene expression.; Protein synthesis, of microorganisms; bacterial and fungal staining procedures;
processing, and regulation; Proteostasis -protein turnover; Cell cycle; identification through microscopy methods; Identification of immune
Non-coding RNA; Cell renewal and cell death; Molecular biology at cells by microscopy.
the cutting edge; Special topics in modern genetics including human
SBL540 Experimental Methods in Biology
genome project.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Laboratory: Visualization of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells;
understanding the requirements for cellular growth and culture; Overlaps with: SBL721
349

Biological Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
Introduction to biomolecules and cells; Electrophoresis, DNA molecules; Lymphocytes development and activation; Vaccines and
fingerprinting and EMSA; Basics of microscopy; Optical Spectroscopy immunity: principles and emerging concepts, safety, herd immunity;
– Raman, IR, Fluorescence, UV-VIS; FCS; Electron Microscopy; NMR; Hypersensitivity and autoimmunity, Acquired immune deficiency
Circular Dichroism; Force Spectroscopy – AFM, Optical Tweezers, syndrome; Current Topics in Immunobiology: viral immune evasion
Magnetic Tweezers; Surface Plasmon Resonance, Mass spectrometry, strategy, cancer neo-antigens, techniques and methodologies –
Chromatography, X-Ray Crystallography, Flow-Cytometry, Recent CAR-T cells.
advances in biophysical techniques – HiTS-FLIP, Mass Photometry, Laboratory: Different types of antigen: antibody interaction
DNA nanotechnology Laboratory: Separation of nucleic acid like agglutination test; direct, indirect and sandwich ELISAs;
and proteins on agarose and polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis immunoprecipitation and Western blotting using specific antibodies;
respectively; difference between native and SDS-PAGE; protein quantitative analysis of cytokine production by flow cytometry;
purification using affinity and size exclusion chromatography; visualization of phagocytosis.
molecular weight calculation from SEC; protein purity and secondary
structure assessment using CD spectroscopy; characterizing cells or SBL630 Advanced Cellular Biology
biomolecules using Raman spectroscopy. 4 Credits (3-0-2)
SBL600 Computational Biology and Data Analyses Pre-requisite(s): SBL500 and SBL520
4 Credits (1-0-6) Lecture: Membrane organisation and cellular ultrastructure;
Intracellular transport- vesicular transport, organellar transport;
Pre-requisite(s): SBL510
Endoplasmic reticulum and Glogi; Protein folding- chaperone assisted
Basics of data: Introduction; biological sequence data sources and folding, ER and membrane proteins; Cytoskeleton- Microtubules,
handling methods; sequence alignment: pairwise, multiple and local motors and mitosis; Microfilaments, Intermediate filaments and
alignment, BLAST, pattern search, phylogenetics and evolutionary tree beyond; Energy conversion: mitochondria and chloroplasts.
search, machine learning methods in sequence analysis; data retrieval Introduction to Cell signalling – growth factor and cytokine signalling;
from GEO and other databases- different formats of sequencing data; The eukaryotic cell cycle, cell death – apoptosis, necrosis, autophagy
microarray technologies - differential gene expression analyses by and other forms of cell death. Interaction between the cell and their
microarrays, modelling DNA microarray data, network analyses; environment, stem cells and their applications, cellular hallmarks of
next-generation sequencing; variants of NGS- transcriptome, exome, cancer and techniques in cell biology: ways of working with cells –
ChIP-seqmethods and different challenges in data analyses; nanopore analysing and visualizing cells.
sequencing technology; genome sequence assembly- de novo, Laboratory: Visualization of cellular organelles like nuclei and
assembly methods and error correction; microbial genomics; OMICs plasma membrane using fluorescent labelling methods; transfection of
methods and practices; Proteomics technologies; quantitative and plasmid DNA in mammalian cells and monitoring expression of GFP in
qualitative proteomics; label-free and SILAC based quantifications; an organelle specific manner; BrdU staining of cellular DNA and FACS
environmental proteomics- filtering and cleaning of MS data; case- sorting: analysis of cell cycle progression; gradient ultracentrifugation
studies with data accessed from MS data servers; omics data analyses based separation of organelles.
pipelines- quality control, omics data analyses pipelines- quality
control, logtransformation and normalization of omics data, file SBL640 Biological pathways
formats, algorithms, data visualization, PCA and statistical analyses; 4 Credits (3-0-2)
biomolecular structure determination methods; long range forces
Pre-requisite(s): SBL500 and SBL520
and potentials; structure visualization, coordinate systems; structure
data repository and retrieval; structure prediction: ab-initio method, Lecture: Introduction to energy metabolism; When you get hungry;
comparative protein structure modelling, ligand-protein interaction, Regulation of glucose metabolism; Regulation of fat metabolism;
ligand docking; basics of protein structural dynamics; metabolic Glucose energy homeostasis and diabetes; Extracellular signal and
networks: network model building, flux analyses, systems biology role of receptors; Intracellular receptors of extracellular signals;
approaches: microscopy data – fixed and live-cell imaging, time-lapse Signaling proteins can act as molecular switches; Nuclear and
videos, dyes and resolution, super-resolution microscopy. transmembrane receptors; Kinases; Protein–protein interactions in
signal transduction ; Glucose metabolism: an example of integration
SBL610 Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology of signaling pathways; Intracellular receptors and nuclear receptors;
4 Credits (3-0-2) Molecular switches- GTPases; Receptor and non-receptor tyrosine
kinases; signaling domains; kinase sensors of metabolism- AMPK,
Pre-requisite(s): SBL500 and SBL520 and SBL540
mTOR and beyond; MAPKs and phosphatases; Signaling in migration
Lecture: Details of molecular cloning and mutagenesis- gene and chemotaxis; Regulatory rewiring of metabolism in cancer; small
transfer, isolation, and manipulation; generation of protein variants molecule modulators of metabolism; Induced pluripotent cells-
by various bioengineering methods; gene editing techniques including mechanisms and applications.
CRISPR-based methods; GM crops; high throughput tools in genomics Laboratory: Monitoring of glycolysis in cultured cells by measurement
and proteomics including microarrays and next-gen sequencing; of glucose uptake and lactate production; effect of external
gene silencing; applications in generation of biotherapeutics, conditions on glycolysis; activity of pyruvate kinase extracted from
nanotechnology, medicine, forensics etc. cells; inhibitors and activators of PK activity; stimulation of signaling
Laboratory: Step-by-step cloning of a target gene (Green pathways by TNF- and phosphorylation of MAP kinase; effect of
Fluorescent Protein for expression in different organelles) in an concentration and time.
expression plasmid by PCR, restriction digestion of plasmid and gene, ⍺
ligation, transformation and screening of colonies by colony PCR. SBQ601 Seminars in Biological Sciences
1 Credits (0-1-0)
SBL620 Immunobiology
Students will be introduced to the latest technical and scientific
4 Credits (3-0-2)
developments in the field of modern biology and biotechnology.
Pre-requisite(s): SBL500 and SBL530 In paper presentation, discussion and workshop mode, aspects of
Lecture: Introduction to Immunobiology: cells and organs of the scientific methodology, research ethics and value systems for pursuing
immune system; Innate immunity and inflammatory responses: a career in academia and industry will be taken up.
pattern recognition receptors - Toll like receptors, phagocytic cells
SBD601 Minor project
such as macrophages and neutrophils, inflammatory cytokines,
complement system and innate immunity; Antigen- antibody: 1 Credits (0-0-12)
structure recognition, specificity; The adaptive immune response: B Project work under the supervision of a faculty at IIT Delhi on a
cell and T cell receptor – structure, gene re-arrangements, antigen research problem to be tackled in the third semester of the MSc
presenting cells, Major histocompatibility complex and co-stimulatory program in Biological Sciences.
350

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biological Sciences
SBD602 Major project/Internship Enteroviruses – Polio, ECHO, coxsackie viruses; Congenital viral
17 Credits (0-0-34) infections – effects on foetus, prevention; Retroviruses – HIV, AIDS;
Arboviruses and Viral zoonoses – arthropod vectors, vertebrate hosts,
Project work under the supervision or co-supervision of a faculty at
transmission cycles, rabies and viral haemorrhagic fevers; Tumour
IIT Delhi in academic/research institutes or an Industry internship in
viruses – oncogenic mechanisms of viruses; Strategies for control
the last semester of the MSc program in Biological Sciences.
of viral infection – active and passive immunoprophylaxis, antiviral
agents; Safety precautions – lab acquired infections, hazard groups
SBV601 Intellectual property Rights In Biosciences
and containment levels; Case studies from literature, evolving and
1 Credit (1-0-0) emerging areas of interest.
Lecture: Introduction to various forms of Intellectual Property Rights,
biotechnology inventions- nature and scope, patent drafting and filing, SBL705 Biology of proteins
International Conventions, treaties and Laws related to IPRs and their 3 Credits (3-0-0)
impact on biotech industry, Technology Transfer, Agreements, Role of
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
IPRs as assets for Start-ups. The lectures will incorporate case studies.
Over-view of protein preparation, modification, maturation; protein-
SBL701 Biometry protein interactions in cells, Heat shock proteins and their structure
3 Credits (3-0-0) and functions in cells, protein mimicry, assisted protein maturation
processes in cells, Protein trafficking and dislocation, protein secretion
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
from cell, kinetics and thermodynamics of protein folding and
Probability and Set theory: Application to biological data, Random unfolding reactions, biomarker discovery, ribosome profiling.
variables: Individuals vs. populations in biological systems,
Classification of data: “Discreteness or Continuity” in biological SBL706 Biologics
evolution, Distributions, Descriptive statistics, Inferential statistics, 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), ANOVA-advanced concepts, Power
analysis of variance, Regression and Correlation, Count/Frequency Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
data. MATLAB based assignment activities will be designed for data Equivalent
simulation and analysis corresponding to the covered lecture material. Definition and classification of biologics, Biologics, Biopharmaceuticals
Vs. conventional drugs, Biosimilars, Role of rDNA technologies,
SBL702 Systems Biology
transgenics (animal and plant), obligonucleotides, peptide, PNAs
3 Credits (3-0-0) mediated therapeutics, drug delivery systems (lipids, cell penetrating
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 peptides), vaccine, monoclonal antibodies produced by and in the
living organisms, nanobiopharmaceutics, overview of the technologies
Overview and history of systems biology; Basic elements of molecular
employed for identification, characterization and production of
biology – DNA and protein, the genetic code, transfer RNA and
biologics, Bioprospecting for novel drug discovery and development,
protein sequences and control of gene expression; Signal transduction
Gene prospecting, plant bioprospecting, marine bioprospecting
– signaling pathways and cascades, information processing and
Phytomedicines, plant secondary metabolites, herbal drugs, edible
transmission, pathway dynamics; Trees and sequences – graphs,
vaccines, Bioresource based alternative medicine systems - AYUSH,
connectivity, trees, flows in networks; Elements of process control –
Southeast Asian medicine system, PIC, MAT and ABS, assessing the
feedback, feed forward and cascade control, dynamics of closed loops,
role of biomimetics, system biology, synthetic biology in biologic
analogies with control of gene expression; Examples of transcription
production, GMPs, legislations, Safety Regulations associated with
networks, determination of simple motifs that are repeated in
biologics in biopharmaceuticals.
genetics; guidelines for analyzing genetics circuits, layouts and
representations, circuit dynamics; modeling, simulation and prediction SBL707 Bacterial pathogenesis
of cellular events, micro-macro relations; Experimental methods in
3 Credits (3-0-0)
systems biology, creation of directed information, existing databases;
platforms and applications; Case studies from literature – circadian Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
clock, metabolic networks, gene circuit design; New frontiers. Equivalent
Common features of bacterial pathogens, structural features, capsules
SBL703 Advanced Cell Biology
and cell walls, Pathogenicity islands, types of toxins produced,
3 Credits (3-0-0)
effect of toxins on host cells, secretion systems, production and
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 function of adhesions, attachment to host cells, mechanisms of
Chemistry of biological structure, function and information flow, cellular invasion, extracellular and intracellular invasion, intracellular
Cellular compartmentalization and molecular organization of survival and multiplication, virulence factors, mechanisms of antibiotic
organelles, Properties and growth of HeLa, Jurkat, SF9 etc.; De-novo resistance, interaction with the host immune system- innate and
synthesis of organelles versus templated replication, Microtubule, adaptive, evasion strategies, Immunocompromised individuals
microfilament and intermediate filaments; Transport of biomolecules; and opportunistic pathogens, specific examples such as Listeria,
Nuclear structure, chromatin packing and transport; Microtubule, Mycobacterium, Shigella, Yersinia etc., strategies for prevention and
action and filament based motile systems, cell-cell recognition and cure, drug designing and scope for future studies, emerging infectious
adhesion; Fluorescence, phase contrast, confocal and AFM; Molecular bacterial pathogens.
basis of cancer, oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes; cell growth
SBL708 Epigenetics in Human Health and Disease
and differentiation.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
SBL704 Human Virology
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Equivalent
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 Introduction – overview of epigenetics in human health and disease;
Introduction, overview and history of medical Virology; Virus Epigenetic mechanisms – basic mechanisms: DNA methylation
structure, classification and replication – symmetries, replication, and genome imprinting –role of DNA methylation; Epigenetics in
maturation and release; Principles of viral pathogenensis- entry, cell cancer Biology – global and region specific changes and effects
tropism. Cellular pathogensis, clearance and persistence; Respiratory on transcription; DNA methylation and repeat instability diseases;
viruses – Influenza, paramyxoviruses, adenonviruses, SARS, RSV; Epigenetic reprogramming and role of DNA methylation in mammalian
Viral gastroenteritis – causative agents, epidemiology; Hepatitus development –role in embryogenesis; Epigenetics in pluriprotency and
viruses – food borne and blood borne; Herpes viruses – infections differentiation of embryonic stems cells; MicroRNA in carcinogenesis –
in immunocompetent and immunocompromised individuals, latency; mechanisms and potential therapeutic options; Epigenetic regulation
351

Biological Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
of viruses by the host –role in pathogenesis; methods in epigenetics- structures; expression and purification of recombinant proteins for
methylation patterns and histone modifications; Case studies from structure determination; basics of X-ray crystallography, space groups,
literature, evolving and emerging areas of interest. diffraction basics, phasing techniques, validation and Ramachandran
plot; cryoelectron microscopy, freezing and imaging techniques,
SBL709 Marine Bioprospecting
model building; small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), application to
3 Credits (3-0-0) protein samples; NMR, chemical shifts, common NMR experiments,
assignment, validation; advantages and disadvantages of each
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
technique, types of applications.
Equivalent
Significance, Overview of Marine Bioresources, Marine Biomedical SBL714 plant Biotechnology and Human Health
Research and Development; Drug discovery continuum in Marine
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Biotechnology, Omics, Biosensors, Biomaterials, Bionanotechnology,
Bioactive compounds, Nutraceuticals, Pharmaceuticals, Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
Cosmeceuticals, Novel Technologies in Marine Research, Sustainable Overview of medicinal plants and their geographical distribution,
development, Case studies, Emerging issues and challenges; IPRs, economics of medicinal plants, KNapSACK family database,metabolic
Marine Biodiversity and Traditional Knowledge (medicine). diversity, genomic and transcriptomic profiling, phenomics,
antivenoms, plant toxins, bioactive peptides, genetic engineering
SBL710 Chemical Biology
and molecular biology technologies such as DNA barcoding, DNA chip
3 Credits (3-0-0) technology, cDNA, AFLP, microarray, siRNA, antisense, bioanalytics,
plant models systems, Nutragenomics, smart and functional foods,
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
Plants based human diseases communicable and noncommunicable
Equivalent
diseases, synthetic biology approaches
Chemical modifications of proteins, protein and nucleic acid
immobilization; The Organic Chemistry of Biological Pathways; cross SBL720 Genome and Healthcare
linking in biomolecules; Physical Chemistry of proteins; fluorescent
3 Credits (3-0-0)
labeling of proteins and nucleic acids, sequencing of proteins and
amino acids, radio labeling of proteins and nucleic acids, chemistry Pre-requisite(s): As per IITD norms for 700 level courses EC
of glycosylation, phosphorylation, sulphonylation, methylation, of 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or Equivalent
proteins and nucleic acids, non-ribosomal peptide synthesis, nano Fundamentals of Chromosomes and Cells, Fundamentals of Gene
particles mediated monitoring of protein conformational transition, Structure, Human Genome Organization, Principles Underlying
folding and unfolding processes; surface properties of proteins and human gene expression, Principles of Genetic Variation, Single Gene
subsequent implications in cellular processes, solubility of proteins, Disorders, Genetic Variation Producing Disease-causing Abnormalities
physical basis for biomolecular structure formation, environmental in DNA and Chromosomes, Identifying Disease Genes and Genetic
effects on structure-function of biomolecules, chemistry of enzymatic Susceptibility to Complex Disease, Genomic Medicine in healthcare,
digestion of nucleotides and proteins, role of metal ions in the Genetic Approaches to Treating Disease, Cancer Genetics and
cellular function, metallo-enzymes and their biosynthesis, Hydrogen/ Genomics, Human Genome Projects, Genetic Testing from Genes to
Deuterium exchange reaction and its application in monitoring Genomes and the ethics of Genetic Testing and Therapy.
biological processes, basic concept of chemical synthesis of life.
SBL721 Techniques in Biomolecular Interactions
SBL711 Cell Signalling
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): As per IITD norms for 700 level courses EC
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and SBL201 (or equivalent) and EC 75 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or Equivalent
Signaling as a basis of cellular communications, conversion of Importance of Biomolecular Interactions, The Sturcture of DNA,
information into cellular response, first messenger, intracellular Protein Structure and DNA Recognition, Protein-DNA Complexes,
and extracellular receptors, second messenger, signaling proteins, Electrophoretic Mobility, Footprinting, Analysis of Interactions by
signal amplification, cascade formation, adaptors, domains, scaffold, SELEX, Surface Plasmon Resonance, Biacore, Fluorescence Resonance
recruitment of signaling proteins, pseudosubstrates, convergence, Energy Transfer, Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy, Chromatin
divergence, cross talk, molecular switches, critical nodes, multisite Immunoprecipitation, Nucleosome Mapping, Introduction to Protein-
protein phosphorylation, G-protein coupled signal transduction, Protein Interaction, the use of SPR, ITC and fluorescence anisotorpy
nuclear receptors, growth factors and tyrosine kinases, mitogen in Studying Protein-Protein Interaction, Protein-protein interactions
activated protein kinases, insulin signal transduction, phosphatases, in human disease, Disruption of Protein-DNA Interactions: An
emerging technologies like antisense, omics, RNAi, high content Opportunity for Cancer Chemotherapy, Therapeutic Tools against
screening, target hopping, combination of mutations, systems Brain Damage.
approach to understand signaling complexity.
SBL722 Stem Cells Biology
SBL712 Dynamics of Infection Biology
3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and BEL110 or CYL110 or CYL120 or
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and either SBL201 or BEL204 or
Equivalent
BEL311 and EC 75
Fundamentals of stem cells;, Types of adult cells, embryonic, adult,
Features of bacterial/viral/other pathogens, molecular evolution
pluripotent; Induced pluripotent stem cells, Genomic reprogramming;
and dissemination, factors influencing dissemination, host entry,
Stem cells in clinic and research, Use of stem cell for therapy;
receptors and pathways, host genetics, persistence and latency, co-
Application of stem cells in various disorders eg. Cardiovascular
infection dynamics, host-pathogen interactions, innate and adaptive
disease, Diabetes, Cancer, Parkinson’s disease, Neurological disorders;
immunity, Th1-Th2 balance, intracellular survival and dissemination,
Approaches for derivation and maintenance of human embryonic
molecular mimicry, apoptosis and necrosis, intervention strategies
stem cells; Human cord blood-derived stem cells in transplantation
and application of bioinformatics in infection biology.
and regenerative medicine; Stem cells for discovery of effective and
SBL713 Introduction to Structural Biology safe new drug; Legal and intellectual property issues associated with
stem cells; Stem cells perspectives: A vision of the future.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and either BEL204 or BEL311 and SBL723 principles of Neural Excitability and
EC 75 Communication
Introduction to protein structure; secondary, tertiary and quaternary 3 Credits (3-0-0)
352

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biological Sciences
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and SBL 100/BBL 131/CML101/ Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and SBL100 for UG students
Equivalent Developmental Anatomy; Cellular identity, differentiation, and
Neural physiology overview; Elements of excitable cell membrane: ion competence; Differential gene expression; Concept of models
channels, transporters and cytoskeletal elements; Physical principles organisms; Signalling mechanisms controlling cell fate and patterning;
of neuronal excitability: Diffusion, Electro-diffusion, Nernst-Plank Cell cycle and programmed cell death; Metabolic regulation of cell
Equation, Donnan equilibrium, Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation; fate decisions; Current technologies to reprogram cellular identity and
Concept of Resting membrane potential (RMP), maintenance of RMP- its implications for therapeutic applications; Genetic/developmental
Pumps and transporters; Exemplar pump: Na+-K+ ATPase-structure mechanisms of birth defects and human diseases; Regulation of
and function; Pores in the membrane: Ion channels; Hodgkin-Huxley cellular identity in cancer; Mechanisms of protein homeostasis in
model for Na+ and K+ channels; Action potentials; Ion channel health, aging and disease, Maintenance, repair and replacement of
structure, function & modulation; Synaptic transmission: vesicle diseased and damaged tissues; Microbiome in health and disease;
transport and recycling, neurotransmitter release; Neurotransmitter- Omics in Health and Disease.
receptor structure-function; Methods to study ion channels and
SBL728 Biological physics
receptors: Patch-Clamp, planar-bilayer, crystallography and Cryo-EM
studies; Action potential generation and conduction: Mechanism and 3 Credits (3-0-0)
models; Simulation of neural activity Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 or BBL110 or BBL131 or equivalent
SBL724 Decoding Protein Modifications in Biology Biology by numbers; statistical physics and thermodynamics in
biology; Macromolecules as Random walk; Nucleic acids structure
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and mechanics; Nucleic acids-protein interactions; Dynamics of
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 with SBL100 or Equivalent molecular motors; Mechanical and Chemical Equilibrium in the Living
Introduction to protein modifications – folded protein versus functional Cell; Cell membrane; Dynamics of cell; Genome engineering by Zinc
protein, residue modifications, proteolytic processing, transient finger nucleases, TALEN, CRISPR; Single molecule vs Bulk; Single
versus stable modifications, co-translational versus posttranslational molecule mechanics; Magnetic tweezers; Optical tweezers; Raman
modifications, domains decoding protein modifications; Protein spectroscopy, Fluorescence; FRET; combining force spectroscopy
phosphorylation – kinases and phosphatases, consequences of with optical spectroscopy; Current advances in Biophysical research.
phosphorylation; Ubiquitination – ubiquitin proteasomal system,
SBL729 Emerging Trends in Tumor Biology
degradative and non-degradative ubiquitination, techniques in
ubiquitination research; SUMOylation and other protein conjugation 3 Credits (3-0-0)
systems; Glycosylation –role in protein structure and function,
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and EC75 for UG students
advanced glycation intermediates, dynamic O-GlcNac modifications;
Tumor microenvironment; tumor heterogeneity - both inter and intra-
Other protein modifications – acetylation, methylation, lipidation
tumoral heterogeneity; intrinsic and extrinsic factors influencing tumor
etc.; Pathogen-induced host protein modifications; Generation of
heterogeneity; cancer cell plasticity – evolving theories of cancer
antibodies against protein modifications; In silico prediction of protein
sternness or tumor-initiation; cancer evolution - factors influencing
modifications; Protein modifications in diagnostics and therapy; Omics
this change and their impact on therapy; cancer metabolism -
approaches for modified proteome; Kinase inhibitors as drugs.
oncometabolites, metabolic exchange and metabolic circuit rewiring in
SBL725 Endocytosis and Intracellular Trafficking different regions of tumors; metabolic symbiosis between cancer and
stromal elements; microbiome influence on cancer (a new emerging
3 Credits 3-0-0)
hallmark of cancer); immuno-oncology - immunophenotyping during
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and SBL100 for UG students cancer, cancer mediated immune evasion and exhaustion and their
Introduction to endocytosis and intracellular trafficking – Structure, impact on immunotherapy; cancer invasion and metastasis - epithelial
function and dynamics of Clathrin-mediated endocytosis; Clathrin- to mesenchymal and mesenchymal to epithelial transition; metastatic
independent endocytosis; Receptor-mediated endocytosis; Traffic dissemination mechanism and colonization/homing; modern tools in
through endocytic and secretory pathway; Regulation of intracellular cancer biology – single cell sequencing, metabolomics, multi-omics;
trafficking by vesicle fusion; Endosomal system and sorting; Biogensis of current approved drugs, combinatorial therapy, immunotherapy - and
endosomes and lysosomes; Functions of Rab GTPases in vesicle fusions; challenges ahead.
Role of SNAREs in phagosome maturation; Modulation of phagosome
maturation by intracellular pathogens: Mycobacterium; Legionella; SBL732 Concepts in Three-Dimensional Cell Culture
Salmonella etc.; Intracellular trafficking and antigen presentation; 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Human diseases due to defect in intracellular trafficking: Lysosomal
Pre-requisite(s): EC75 and SBL100 for UG students. None for
storage disease, Atherosclerosis, Niemann Pick C Diseases, Cancers,
PG students
Neurodegeneration; Exploiting and endocytosis for nanomedicine.
Introduction and historical perspective of 3D cell culture; Need for
SBL726 Biological Motors studying biology in 3-dimensions; Fundamentals and types of 3D
3 Credits 3-0-0) cultures (organoids, spheroids, assembloids etc.); Static vs dynamic
cultures; Requirements & methods for 3D cultures; Applications of 3D
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and SBL100 for UG students
cultures (organ systems, precision medicine, clinical trials); Limitations
Introduction to molecular motors and biological motor proteins, and parameters for optimization of current 3D culture technologies;
historical perspectives, basics principles and broad functions; Ethics and future implications for 3D cultures (bioprinting, organ-on-
Polymerization motors: actin, tubulin and intermediary filaments- chip, microphysiological systems); Visual Guide to 3D Cell Culture
their structure-function, dynamics – from in-vivo and in-vitro studies Techniques.
and regulation; Force generators: Myosins, dyneins and Kinesisn –
their structure-function and reulation. Rotational motors – FoF1ATP SBL733 Introduction and Techniques:
synthase and bacterial flagella (structure and function). Eukaryotic Immunometabolism
Cilia/flagella; DNA helicase and polymerase; Viral assembly – with
3 Credits (3-0-0)
specific examples of bacteriophages and retroviruses; recent advance
(research articles) on organelle transport; Nuclear motors; Molecular Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 for UG students. None for PG
motors associated with disease – with emphasis on myosin, dynein Introduction: The role of metabolism in adaptive and innate immune
and kinesin; Methodologies used to study biological motor proteins; response manifestation. Signalling pathways critical for metabolic
Biological motors in futuristic design. balance: mT0R/akt, PPAr etc. Detailed understanding of individual
immune cells and their metabolic dependencies. 1) Metabolism and
SBL727 Advanced Developmental Biology
macrophage function, 2) T cells and their effector functions linked to
3 Credits 3-0-0) metabolism 3) Efferocytosis and influence of metabolic cycles on the
353

Biological Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
process 4) Dendriti cells effector functions 5) subcellular metabolic present their research, to critique the research of colleagues and
compartmentalization and mitochondrial learn about the best research in their fields. Discussions will be
structure dynamics 6) Epigenetics and it's dependence on metabolic held on scientific methodology and inculcated with a value system
fluxes for pursuing a career in science. Activities will be carried out in
Diseases: 1) Cancer: Role of metabolism and metabolic behaviour of workshop mode.
tumor immune cells, Therapeutics. 2) Aging and Senescence: Influence
SBC796 Graduate Student Research Seminar-II
of diet of aging. Contribution of individual immune cells to the aging,
Metabolic reversal of 3) Obesity/Diabetes and Atherosclerosis: 0.5 Credit (0-0-1)
lipid bodies, foam cells and their formation . efferocytosis in the
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
development of the lifestyle disorders 4) Host-Pathogen interactions:
Special topics in research will be assigned by Coordinator; results
understanding how bacterial and viral pathogens have learnt to hijack
of the research of each student registered for the course will be
host metabolic networks to gain survival advantage.
discussed; Discussions on scientific material from recently published
Methodologies and techniques: experimental design and
papers in areas related to their research; The “Laboratory” activities
methodologies to perform immunometabolism experiments.
will include delivery of seminars on their research and participation
Untargeted', Targeted metabolomics, Trace metabolomics- sample
in the seminars and critique.
prep and data analysis. Lipidomics and methodologies Experimental
design and execution of Seahorse, ouroboros, Scenith. Hands on data
SBS800 Independent Study
analysis on Seahorse data sets.
3 Credits (0-3-0)
SBL750 Quantitative Biology Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
3 Credits (3-0-0) The course is aimed at providing the student an opportunity to pursue
a special research topic. A research topic assigned and mutually
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and SBL201 (or equivalent) and EC 75
agreed upon by the faculty and student. Registration will require the
Overview of quantitative biology; Biomolecules - a study of how
submission of a proposal through the research committee on the topic
information is code in molecules - DNA, RNA and proteins, information
clearly delineating the objectives to be achieved.
representation; Molecular sequences - the alignment problem,
PAM and BLOSUM matrices, applications - global, local and overlap
SBL801 Signal Transduction and Drug Target
alignment; Gene prediction - computational gene finding, ab-initio
Identification
methods, comparative methods; Molecular evolution - molecular
clock, explicit models and evolutionary rate estimation; Population 3 Credits (3-0-0)
genetics - polymorphism, genetic diversity and Neutral theory; Testing Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
evolutionary hypothesis; Genetic circuits - motifs search, satio-
Eukaryotic cellular communications, importance of signal transduction,
temporal logic, methods of analyses; Protein structure prediction,
principles of signaling, recurring themes of signal transduction,
protein-protein interaction networks, drug target identification,
reception, transduction, response, signal amplification, coordination of
Biological network dynamics; Biological pattern formation; Self
signaling, cascade formation, structure to function, anchors, adaptors,
organization in biology.
scaffold, recruitment of signaling proteins, topology and functional
domains, dual specificity, modules, convergence, divergence, cross
SBV750 Bioinspiration and Biomimetics
talk, receptors, G-protein coupled signal transduction, growth
1 Credit (1-0-0) factors and tyrosine kinases, mitogen activated protein kinases,
insulin signal transduction, critical nodes, protein phosphorylation,
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
drug target identification, mechanism of drug action against signal
Introduction to Bioinspiration and biomimetics, Bioinspiration pools
transduction, antagonists of cell surface receptors and nuclear and
marine and terresterial plants and animals, Biomimetic/Bioenabled
receptors, ion channel blockers, transport inhibitors, targeting protein
materials, biomineralisation, Biomimetic ahesives and attachment
kinases and phosphatases, inhibitors of kinases and phosphatases,
devices in nature, prosthetics function and design, bioinspired
pseudosubstrates, examples of clinical drugs against protein kinases/
robotics, biomimetic pattern formation, colour and camougflage,
phosphatases, new and emerging technologies to identify drug target
photocells, role in agriculture and human health, future prospects
like antisense, omics, RNAi, high content screening, target hopping,
in the industry.
combination of mutations, systems approach, complexity in signaling,
techniques in signal transduction.
SBL751 Chemical and Molecular Foundations of Cell
3 Credits (3-0-0) SBL802 Macromolecular Structure and Data processing
Pre-requisite(s): SBL100 and SBL201 (or equivalent) and EC 75 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Protein conformation, dynamics and function, Enzyme activity, Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Biomolecular interactions in cell, biomolecular assemblies in the
Treatment of macromolecules to generate suitable crystals, hanging
cell, Generation and storage of metabolic energy, Biosynthesis of
drop and sitting drop techniques, seeding, cryopotecting and freezing
macromolecular precursors like, amino acids, lipids, hormones,
crystals, acquisition of diffraction data, synchrotron radiation,
nucleotides, Characterisation and identification of cells, Genes,
indexing and scaling data, space group identification, symmetry
genomics and chromosomes, Genetic material, DNA replication,
elements, Fourier transformation and structure factors, the phase
Repair, Translation, Mutagenesis, mutations and mutants, Plasmid and
problem, heavy atom methods, molecular replacement, anomalous
transposable element, Recombinant DNA and genetic engineering,
X-ray scattering, calculation of electron density, model building and
Protein targeting into membranes and organelles, Vesicular traffic,
phase refinement, co-crystallography, small angle X-ray scattering,
secretion, and endocytosis, Cellular organization of movement,
preparing samples for transmission electron microscopy, negative
microtubules, Eukaryotic cell cycle, functions and mode of action of
staining, cryo-techniques for freezing grids, manual vs. automated
nucleus, Nerve cells, Immune response, Evolution of cells, prebiotic
data collection, cryotomography, software packages for data collection
synthesis, RNA catalysis, evolution of gene structure, Epigenetics,
and processing, generating a model, refinement and validation, time
Non-coding RNA, Hologenome.
resolved cryoEM.
SBC795 Graduate Student Research Seminar-I
SBp810 Advanced Bioscience Techniques
0.5 Credit (0-0-1) 2 Credits (0-0-4)
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 Pre-requisite(s): EC 75
The course is aimed at giving the student a forum to periodically Particle sizing, biological and biomolecular visualization tools,
354

Courses of Study 2024-2025 Biological Sciences
advanced and analytical spectrometry, cell and molecular separation messengers and receptors, GTP-binding proteins; Calcium Signaling
techniques, DNA and protein interaction techniques, membrane – free, bound and trapped calcium, mechanisms regulating calcium
interaction and signalling, bioreactors, tissue culture, transgene concentration, calcium changes in single cells; protein phosphorylation
technology, electrophysiology methods. as a switch, protein kinase A, protein kinase C, structure of signaling
pathways, extracting motifs from pathways, relating motifs to
SBV881 Advances in Chemical Biology observations; dynamics and periodicity in signaling pathways.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
SBV887 Current Topics in Computational Biology
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Structural aspects of proteins and nucleic acids, Mechanism of
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
action of biological molecules, Chemical approaches to solve
biological problems, Designing chemical tools for addressing Bring about awareness of the challenges in Genomics, Proteomics,
problems in biology, Bioconjugate chemistry, Recent developments Metabolomics and Structural Biology.
in these areas.
SBV888 Current Trends in Computer Aided Drug Discovery
1 Credit (1-0-0)
SBV882 Biological Membranes
1 Credit (1-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Teach students various methods for target identification, and
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
applications QSAR and molecular modelling in drug discovery.
Introduction to the hydrophobic effect, Phospholipid model systems,
Cellular membrane asymmetry, Membrane dynamics, Membrane
SBV889 Diagnostic Virology
trafficking, Membrane fusion, Membrane proteins (Form and function),
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Small molecule permeability, Pores channels and transporters, Lipid
systems for drug delivery. Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Introduction to diagnostic virology – direct and indirect methods,
SBV883 Chaperone and protein Conformational Disorders specimens and window period; Microscopy – light microscopy, electron
1 Credit (1-0-0) microscopy, and fluorescence microscopy in virus identifications;
Methods of virus isolation – cell culture, embryonated egg inoculation
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
and animal inoculation; Viral antigen detection – methods, assay
Molecular mechanism of protein misfolding, fate of aggregated characteristics, rapid antigen identification techniques; Detection of
proteins in the cell, various protein misfolding disorders in humans, viral antibodies – methods, role of quantitative measurements, class-
mechanism of action of molecular chaperones in various cells, specific immunoglobulin detection; Viral nucleic acids – amplification,
chaperone assisted suppression of protein misfolding. detection and quantitation methods; Molecular epidemiology of
viral infections – high throughput methods; Identifying antiviral
SBV884 Elements of Neuroscience resistance – genotypic and phenotypic approaches; Quality control in
1 Credit (1-0-0) diagnostic virology – internal and external quality control, international
standards, and Shewhart control charts.
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
Introduction to cell biology of neurons; presynaptic and post
SBV890 Kinetoplastid parasites and Novel Targets
synaptic mechanisms; signal transduction cascades; neural
1 Credit(1-0-0)
integration; Hodgkin-Huxley experiments; Na and K pumps;
physiological significance of pump modulation; Na and K channels; Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
type and function of different Ca activated K channels; structure Kinetoplastid diseases, transmission, clinical features, immune evasion,
function and inactivation; tools for studying Ca signalling; caging treatment, antimicrobial chemotherapy, drug resistance, cross –
and releasing Ca in the neurons; role of nitric oxide; Long term resistance, Leishmania, promastigotes and amastigotes, procyclic and
potentiation. metacyclic, macrophage, interaction with sand fly, cytokine response,
transmission, syndromes associated with leishmaniasis, microtubules
SBV885 protein Aggregations and Diseases in kinetoplastida, dynamics and posttranslational modifications, drug
1 Credit (1-0-0) interactions, resistance against tubulin binding agents, arsenite
resistance in Leishmania, transporters in kinetoplastid protozoa and
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
drug targets, leishmanial glucose transporters, function of histone
Introduction to protein aggregation (amorphous and amyloid), types deacytylases in kinetoplastid protozoa, DNA – topoisomerases in
of aggregates, difference between aggregation and precipitation; Leishmania, a possible therapeutic target, exoproteome of leishmania,
External and internal factors for protein aggregation, pH, temperature importane and its application in Leishmania.
and protein concentration effects; hydrophobicity, discordant helices;
Structural and conformational prerequisites of amyloidogenesis, SBV891 – Virus Host Interactions
predominance of beta-sheet, alpha-helices or random coils of native
1 Credit (1-0-0)
protein; generic nature of protein folding and misfolding, Cytotoxic
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
intermediates in the fibrillation pathway, Oxidative stress and protein
deposition disease, Protein aggregation, ion channel formation, and Introduction to the virus life cycle; host cell surface molecules utilized
membrane damage, Recent trends in prevention of amyloidosis; as virus receptors, mechanism of cellular membrane penetration
drugs, antibodies, combination therapy. for enveloped and non-enveloped animal viruses, cellular entry of
bacteriophages and plant viruses; icosahedral and helical capsids,
SBV886 Signaling pathway Analysis disassembly and transport of genome to the replication site, process
of replication, modification of cellular organelles and hijacking of host
1 Credit (1-0-0)
cell resources; site and manner of progeny virus assembly ; lytic and
Pre-requisite(s): EC 100
lysogenic viruses; virus egress and involvement of the host secretory
Introduction to modelling of biological systems – history, types of pathway; host defence mechanisms, virus strategies to evade host
models, macroscopic phenomena, modelling of cellular systems; immune system, antiviral therapies and drug discovery.
hierarchy in information transmission and utilization, interaction
between different levels of information leading complex behaviour; SBV892 Current Topics in Ion Channels and Receptors
robustness of cellular systems and its significance; molecules that
1 credit (1-0-0)
transmit signals, role of signaling in regulation of cellular functions,
gene regulation; signal transduction – evolution and history; first Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 with SBL 100/ BBL131
355

Biological Sciences Courses of Study 2024-2025
Overview of neuronal physiology; Ion channels and receptors of SBV896 Single Molecule Biophysics
excitable cell membrane; Ion channel properties: Permeability, 1 Credit (1-0-1)
Selectivity, Gating and Rectification; Nernst-Plank and Goldman-
Hodgkin-Katz equations; Classification of ion channels and receptors; Pre-requisite(s): SBL100/BBL110/BBL131/equivalent
Structure and function studies of ion channels and receptors: Introduction to the course; Entropy and free energy – Boltzmann
voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels, ligand-gated acetylcholine distribution, mass action law etc; Single molecule vs Bulk;
receptor channel, mechano-gated mscL and Piezo channels; Allosteric Magnetic and Optical tweezer; Single molecule studies of nucleic
modulation of ion channels: theories and application; Ion channel and acids and their proteins; Cellular mechanochemistry; Raman
receptor pharmacology; Methods to study ion channels and receptors: spectroscopy, Fluorescence; Crossbreeding of tweezing techniques
Patch-Clamp, planar-bilayer, crystallography and Cryo-EM studies; with spectroscopy.
Simulation of single channel activity and macroscopic currents from
kinetic modeling. SBV897 Angiogenesis in Health and Diseases
1 Credit (1-0-0)
SBV893 Cellular Differentiation and Therapy
Pre-requisite(s): EC100 and SBL100 for UG students
1 credit (1-0-0)
Angiogenesis and vasculogenesis; the lymphatic system; introduction
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 with SBL100 or Equivalent to blood vessels: types, structure, and composition. Blood vessel
Introduction to differentiation including concepts of totipotency, components – endothelial cells, pericytes, and vascular smooth muscle
pluripotency (stem cell), multipotency. Examples of the fertilized egg, cells; vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) biology – its role
somatic stem cells and plant callus will be included. Differentiation in angiogenesis and vascular permeability; basic fibroblast growth
vis-a-vis cellular proliferation. Embryonic differentiation and the factor biology; VEGF and FGF receptors, tyrosine kinase signaling and
formation of the three germ layers. Fate specification by growth activation; angiogenesis and immune system; tumor angiogenesis -
factors, concept of microenvironment and mechanotransduction Judah Folkman hypothesis, discovery and how the field of vascular
in differentiation. Examples of the haematopoietic system. Nuclear biology in cancer has evolved over the years; tumor vasculature and
signatures and differentiation. Cellular reprogramming–concepts and perfusion; antiangiogenesis as a current therapeutic strategy – where
methodologies used including dedifferentiation - induced pluripotent we stand?; blood vessel inhibition vs normalization; vessel co-option
stem cells (iPSC). Differentiation and its association with diseases and vascular mimicry; atherogenesis; anti-angiogenic therapy in age-
such as Leukemia. How differentiation may be used in therapy. related macular degeneration; Vascular aging; different in vitro, in
Differentiation in the large-scale production of specific cell types. vivo, and ex vivo models to study vascular biology.
Future perspectives.
SBV898 Techniques in Mammalian Cell Culture
SBV894 Current Methods in Mammalian Genetics 1 Credit (1-0-0)
1 credit (1-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): EC100 and SBL100 for UG students. None
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 and SBL100 or Equivalent for PG students
Introduction to mouse genetics – genotypes, genetic backgrounds and Introduction and historical perspective to animal cell culture,
methods; Conventional methods of gene targeting and transgenics culture conditions, cell line characterization, scale-up, biosafety
– gene delivery into embryonic stem cells or zygotes, gene-traps, levels, techniques for genetic manipulation of cells including viral
breeding strategies; Establishment of cell culture models from mice transduction and CRISPR/Cas editing, advanced techniques such as
– Fibroblasts and macrophage cultures, rescue strategies using iPSC production and culture, embroids and organoids.
retro/lentiviral transduction; Gene targeting in cells using CRISPR/
Cas9 - mutations, activation and suppression; In vivo conditional SBV899 Assays in Drug Development
knockout strategies using Cre/lox and Flippase/FRT system; Bone- 1 Credit (1-0-0)
marrow chimeras; Animal models of human diseases.
Pre-requisite(s): CML101 or SBL100 or BBL131 for UG students.
SBD895 MS Research project None for PG students.
36 Credits (0-0-72) Protein and nucleic acid quantification assays- spectrophotometric-
The research problem will be assigned by the supervisor. It is expected and fluorometric methods, qPCR. Assays for monitoring receptor-
that the student will undertake the problem early in the program. drug interaction – radioactivity-, fluorescence-, luminescence-,
surface plasmon resonance (SPR)- and flow cytometry-based
SBV895 Developmental Biology assays. Enzyme kinetics and inhibition assays – Basics of enzyme
Kinetics, biochemical assays for miscellaneous therapeutically
1 credit (1-0-0)
relevant enzymes, different modes of enzyme inhibition and assays
Pre-requisite(s): EC 75 with SBL100 or Equivalent for studying the mechanism of action, high-throughput screening
Overview of the principles of animal development: how a single- assays. Immunoassays- radioimmunoassay (RAI), enzyme-linked
celled fertilised egg becomes an embryo and then a fully formed immunosorbent assay (ELISA), miscellaneous applications. Protein-
adult body; Understanding role of gene networks: how does the protein interaction inhibition assays – ELISA-type, fluorescence-based
control of gene regulation contribute to development? Cell fate and immunoprecipitation assays for monitoring inhibition of protein-
and differentiation: overview of the mechanisms of developmental protein interaction. Cell viability and cytotoxicity assays – assays
commitment and maintenance of cell differentiation; Patterning: relying on reduction of tetrazolium and resazurin compounds, activity
how are the axes formed? Organogenesis: how do developmental of protease markers, ATP detection, real-time assay for viable cells,
processes affect tissue homeostasis and restoration? Growth and dye- and marker-based analysis of dead cells. Cellular thermal shift
post-embryonic development: aging and senescence; Regeneration: assay (CETSA) – basic principle and miscellaneous applications, high
how can mechanisms of development be re-employed? Comparative throughput CETSA, MS-CETSA. Assays for ADME/Pharmacokinetic
development and evolution: how does comparison between parameters – Assays for evaluating lipophilicity, aqueous solubility,
species explain the emergence of new features? Experimental microsome stability, plasma stability, plasma protein binding,
developmental biology: model organisms and the main techniques membrane permeability, cytotoxicity, cytochrome P450 inhibiton,
to study development. tmax, Cmax, t1/2, area-under-curve (AUC) etc.
356

Bharti School of Telecommunication Technology
and Management
BSp710 Communication and Signal processing Demapper using Soft-decision/Hard-decision principles building a
Technologies Laboratory complete end to end system: design of band-pass processors for cell
phone application, sample implementation of OFDM waveform TX
3 Credits (0-1-4)
and RX – like Wifi-6 o LTE. Sample implementation of single carrier
Pre-requisite(s): ELL205, ELL411 waveform (DVB-S2. Cable/QAM, Doesis) both for RX and TX, design
Signal processing tools – Keil for ARM processor, Code Composer of audio codec, design of rake receiver- all could be implemented on
Studio (CCS), Field Programme Gate Array (FGPA) processor; Pulse FPGA or DSP such as ARM processor.
shaping and inter-symbol interference, digital filtering; design of
ADC, DAC, PLL; receiver design; design of encoder and decoders:
BSD895 MS Research project
Convolution, Viterbi. Group-based term projects such as advanced
coding schemes (LDPC, Turbo, RS, Polar, etc.) in conjunction with 36 Credits (0-0-72)
357

School of public policy
SpL361 Information & Communication Technologies SpL704 Introduction to public policy and STI
and Society 3 Credits (3-0-0)
4 Credits (3-0-2) Introduction to Public Policy; Disciplinary Evolution and History of
Introduction to information & Communications Technologies (ICT) Public Policy; Policy Instruments; Policy Narratives; Policy Cycle; Policy
including Internet of Things (IoT), smart city concept, ICT & urban Design Vs. Policy Implementation; Governance; Global Perspectives
sensing, ICT use in transportation and applicability, policy for ICT in on Public Policy; Theories, Frameworks, Modelsand Heuristics of Public
education and case studies of NMEICT projects, global water crisis Policy Introduction to Science & Technology Policy; Rational for
and sanitation challenges, ICT for water & sanitation, role of ICT Science-Policy Interface; Science-Policy Interactions; Governance
in health, role of ICT towards inclusive society with policy nexus, of STI Enterprises; Science Policy and International Affairs.
municipal waste management & ICT, e-governance, limitations
and challenges of ICT, digital divide, unanticipated consequences
SpL705 public Institutions in India: Theory and practice
of ICT, social change and the cult of technology, technology and
disempowerment, data privacy, data protection bill/regulation (GDPR 3 Credits (3-0-0)
& DPDPB), conceptualization of ICT-based potential solution. Executive, Legislative, Judicial Branches and Balance of Powers;
Political Parties and Election Commission; Planning Commission
SpV399 Special Module is policy Studies and Niti Aayog; Bureaucracies and Public Choice Theory; IRS
and Taxation, GST; Police and Law Enforcement; CAG, CVC, CIC
1 Credit (1-0-0)
and Institutions of Accountability; Banking System and RBI; The
For the particular domain, topic or issue chosen by the instructor
Value of Institutional Independence; The Regulatory State; Federal
(e.g. climate change, energy, agriculture etc.) the course would aim
Institutions: Finance Commission, GST Council, Ministerial Forums
to familiarized students with key concepts in science and technology
etc.; Decentralisation and 73rdand 74thAmendments; The Role of
policy making. It would include studying various elements, actors and
Civil Society; Redistributive Institutions (PDS, MGNREGA, DBT);
stages in the policy process and critical perspectives on unpacking
Introduction to Case Study Methodology, Studying Organizations,
and understanding methods of policy analysis for the particular issue
Systems and Processes; Interplay between public institutions
chosen by the instructor.
and how they influence, affect and change each other.
SpL701 Introduction to Science and Technology policy
Studies SpL706 Science, Technology, Innovation and
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0) Sustainable Development
The course will begin with a brief theoretical understanding of 3 Credits (3-0-0)
policy making processes and touch upon the specifics of science Sustainable development and the SDGs; Historical perspective on
and technology policy systems in India. It will specifically examine processes of technology development to meet societal objectives;
the role of stakeholders in the process such as grassroots voices nature and dynamics of technological change; elements of
and civil society organisations, industry, academia, international innovation processes and perspectives on organizing for effective
actors, and policy makers. It will then examine the role of science innovation (and role of key actors); case studies on role of STI in
and technology in policies in selected current and emerging key agriculture, health, energy, and environment; potential future role
sectors, e.g. transport, agriculture, health, energy, environment, or of STI in SD in India.
information and communication technologies. The course will also
explore the inherently political and contested nature of decision
SpL707 Tools for policy Analysis
making in the policy arena.
3 Credits (3-0-0)
SpL702 Approaches to Science and Technology policy Introduction to the policy process; Role of policy analyst;
Studies Stakeholder analysis; Graphical methods for visualizing data;
Cost-Benefit Analysis; Experiments and quasi-experiments; Projection
1.5 Credits (1.5-0-0)
Techniques; Delphi Technique; Decision-trees; Multi-criteria Decision
The course identifies six themes which are key to understanding
Analysis (MCDA); Expert elicitation.
Science and Technology Policy (STP) viz., Safety, Ownership,
Ethics/morality, Knowledge base, Participation and Choice of policy
instruments. Through sociological, economic, regulatory and legal SpL708 Statistics for public policy
literature on selected current and emerging key sectors, e.g. 3 Credits (3-0-0)
transport, agriculture, health, energy, environment, or information
Overlaps with: MSL721, HUL315/HSL719
and communication technologies, it invites the students to keenly
understand the various underlying approaches in STP. Probability and statistics Basics (Random variables, Population and
sample, Parameters and Estimates, Normal distribution, Sampling
SpL703 Research Methods for public policy distributions of estimates, Confidence intervals); Hypothesis testing
(z-test, t-tests, chi square tests, p-values, comparison of means tests);
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Bivariate linear regression model; Multivariate regression model
Overlaps with: HUL709/814, HUV781, MSL709 (Gauss Markov Theorem, Inference and Prediction, ANOVA); Model
Paradigms of research; Deductive vs Inductive approaches; Specification Errors (Omitted Variables, Irrelevant Variables); Dealing
Observational vs Experimental approaches; Formulating research with real-world issues (Multicollinearity, Heteroskedasticity, Outliers);
questions and hypotheses; Approaches to review of literature; Categorical variables in linear regression (Dummy Variables, Logit/
Identifying population of interests and units of analysis; Identifying Probit models); Introduction to Time Series Analysis; Introduction
relevant actors and stakeholders; Identifying system boundaries; to Panel Data Analysis; Correlation vs Causation.
Formulating a theory of change; Conceptualizing and operationalizing
variables of interest; Survey design; Qualitative data collection:
SpL709 principles of Economics for public policy
sample size determination, sampling techniques, modes of
observation (case studies, focus groups, interviews); Quantitative 3 Credits (3-0-0)
data collection: sample size determination and sampling techniques, Introduction to Economics; Supply, demand and markets; Theories
modes of observation (surveys, questionnaires, secondary data); of consumer demand and cost; Welfare economics and deadweight
Elementary qualitative data analysis; Elementary quantitative data loss; Market failures and government policies; Market structure;
analysis; Research Budgeting; Research Monitoring, External and Taxation and National accounting; Productivity and growth; Saving
Internal Validity; Dealing with attrition and missing values; Research and investment; Unemployment; the Monetary System; International
ethics; Policy Communication. trade; Monetary and Fiscal Policy.
358

Courses of Study 2024-2025 School of Public Policy
SpL711 Modelling Complex Adaptive Systems for policy distribution of greenhouse gas emissions and possible technological,
Analysis market and regulatory trajectories to mitigate them will be discussed
with the emphasis on how different trajectories lead to questions on
3 Credits (3-0-0)
geographic, inter-generational and distributional equity. The students
Definitions of system thinking; complexity, adaptation; and socio-
would examine economic, political and institutional frameworks for
technical systems; Understanding complex adaptive systems; and
understanding policies and practices designed to reduce greenhouse
the properties that characterize it; Put in perspective commonly
gas emissions, vulnerability to climate change and facilitate adaptation
applied modelling approaches in policy analysis with the framework
in the face of climate threats and explore how policy can produce or
of complex adaptive systems; A framework for modelling complex
reduce vulnerability. The course will draw on theoretical framings and
adaptive systems; agent based modelling; Practice-oriented steps to
methodological tools from multiple disciplines including atmospheric
building an agent-based model for a policy problem of your choice
sciences, economics, environmental policy, psychology and sociology.
–problem formulation, concept formulation, model formulations,
verification and validation.
SpL722 Managing the Energy Transition
3 Credits (3-0-0)
SpL712 Comparative Industrial policy
Introduction to the global energy transition; Features of historical
3 Credits (3-0-0)
technological transitions; Systemic and evolutionary views on
Overlaps with: HUL736 technological change; Introduction to policy studies in the context of
Comparative Industrial Policy, Political Economy of Economic technological transitions; Domestic and international politics of energy
Development, Primary vs. Secondary vs. Tertiary Production and transitions and climate change; Firm strategies under uncertainty and
Policy Environments Supporting Each, Infant Industry Argument, change; the role of finance.
Import Substituting Industrialization and Autarky, Dependency Theory,
Market Protection vs. Market Integration, East Asian Model vs. SpL723 Understanding public policy Making through
Other Developing Countries, Causes and Consequences of Industrial Case Studies
Concentration, Growth Diagnostics and Building Comparative 3 Credits (3-0-0)
Advantage, Industrial Clusters and SEZs, Market vs. State-Led Growth,
Introduction to public policy making: Basic concepts, actors,
Cooperative and Market-Preserving Federalism; Institutional Form
institutions, and the policy stages heuristic and its limitations;
and State Capacity.
Theoretical approaches to policy-making: Multiple Streams Framework;
Case study- Public health interventions in vector-borne diseases -
SpL719 public Interest Technologies
Polip; Social construction of target populations and policy design;
3 Credits (3-0-0) Case study - Public health interventions in vector-borne diseases
• Theories (publicness, public sphere, public values, and public - Kala-Azar, Guinea-worm; punctuated Equilibrium theory; Case-
participation) for constructing the notions of public. study Public health interventions in reduction in infant and maternal
• Roles of different stakeholders - organisations, governments, mortality; Case-study - domestic high technology manufacturing
non-profits, communities, and knowledge institutions - in shaping and indigenization of manufacturing in the Pharmaceutical sector;
public interest technology and the ways they do so. The Advocacy Coalition Framework - Case-study - Aadhaar and
Direct Benefit Transfer: Housing, MGNREGA, PM-KISAN; Institutional
• Issues/challenges of integrating public - both as a set of values
rational choice framework; Case-study - domestic high technology
and as citizens - in developing new technologies.
manufacturing and indigenization of manufacturing in the Solar PV
• Norms and practices, including for policy making, management
and wind sector; Alternative views on role of rationality in the policy
and governance, that can shape technology for public interest
process; Case study- domestic high technology manufacturing and
and public outcomes.
indigenization of manufacturing in the Defence sector; learnings form
• The opportunities and challenges of technology development
applying theoretical frameworks to case-studies.
models to generate public outcomes.
• Starting Civil Society Organisations.
SpL724 Electricity Sector Reforms in the Renewables
Era
SpL720 Energy and Infrastructure Finance: A public
3 Credits (3-0-0)
policy Lens
3 Credits (3-0-0) Overlaps: ELL870 Restructured Power System
The role of finance in creating energy and infrastructure assets; Evolution of the vertically integrated electricity utility, initial experiences
Basics of DCF Method and Valuation; Applying DCF to Infrastructure in developed countries and early reformers; Independent Electricity
Investment; Difficulties of Raising Long-Term Finance; Project Producers (IPPs), regulation and deregulation, Independent System
Finance; Role of Govts in Facilitating Infra Investment; State vs. Operators; Power system cost structures, power system economics,
Private Financing; Debt vs Equity, Risk Capital; The Role of the power purchase agreements – long-term risk distribution, electricity
Promoter and Risk-Taking; Stages of Exit for Infra Projects; Public market design – day-ahead, intraday, balancing markets, ancillary
Private Partnerships: The Promise and the Reality; Hedging and Price services. Tariff design for end consumers, retail competition, capacity
Risk; Infrastructure Booms and Busts; Bank Financing vs. Project remuneration mechanisms. Critique of the reforms experienced
Financing through Bonds; DFIs, NBFCs and Risk Assessment; Currency worldwide, salience of the distribution sector, access and affordability,
markets and infrastructure finance, bilateral aid and EXIM banks; reforms rollback, renewables. Country experiences -China, Germany,
Tenders, bidding and contracts; Arbitration, renegotiation and the USA (California, Texas), Mexico, UK; Indian experience – Electricity
costs of extended dispute resolution; The effects of infrastructure Act, cases of Enron (Dabhol), Odisha, Delhi.
on public finances; National vs. Local Infrastructure; Controllable vs. Renewables penetration – impact on access, electricity for agriculture
Uncontrollable Risks, Cash flow Management. tariffs, regional equity, national programmes -- KUSUM, Saubhagya,
Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana
SpL721 perspectives on Climate Change: Implications Excel-based exercises on the financial viability of Discoms using actual
for policy utility data. Explore and develop renewables and reforms trajectories
3 Credits (3-0-0) for different states. Electricity sector reforms and the larger public
policy rubric-centre-state issues, effects of the dominant global
The course will develop a basic understanding of science of climate
discourse on the renewables programme in India
change, the associated uncertainties and the processes that link
this science with policymaking. The impacts of climate change on
socio-economic and natural systems and the link between climate SpL730 STI policy and Agriculture
change, and development policies will be discussed. The global 3 Credits (3-0-0)
359

School of Public Policy Courses of Study 2024-2025
Introduction to Agriculture, Development and Food Security; STI • Introduction to GIS (Spatial data structure, maps, projection
contribution to Agricultural Development; Types of Agriculture; and overview of geospatial technology etc.)
Formal Institutions and Organization of Agricultural Research and • Use of GIS in Public Policy Research
Policy Making; ToT; Agro Ecology; Linear to Systems thinking in
• Theories and training on basic GIS analysis and their application
Agri-Systems; Agricultural Knowledge and Information Systems;
in public policy research (e.g., raster/vector processing,
Farmer’s Field School, Farmer First Movement; Agricultural Innovation
digitization, geodatabase creation and management, overlay
Systems (AIS); Agricultural Research for Development (AR4D);
analysis, creation of thematic maps etc.)
Mission Oriented Agricultural Innovation Systems (MAIS); Institutional
• Advanced GIS analysis and their application in public policy
Change in Agriculture; Science of Scaling; Smallholder agriculture;
research (e.g., spatial interpolation techniques, hot-spot analysis,
Global Food Security and Global Agri-Food Systems; Water, Energy
network analysis etc, geographically weighted regression, zonal
and Food Security Nexus; Sustainable Agriculture; New Institutions
statistics).
for Global Agriculture; Agriculture 4.0.
• Public Participatory GIS (PPGIS) in public policy research
SpL740 Causal Inference and Impact Assessment
• Use of nighttime satellite data for social science research
3 Credits (3-0-0) • Practical on basic and advanced GIS analysis
Introduction to Impact Assessment; Causality and the Problem of • Case studies on GIS applications in public health and natural
Confounders; Counterfactuals; Experimental design in social sciences: resource management
Randomized Control Trials or RCTs; Implementation failures within the
RCT framework: Non-Compliance, Attrition, Interference; Critique of SpL781 Special Topics in Climate Change policy
RCTs; Instrumental Variables; Matching Estimators; Propensity Score
3 Credits (3-0-0)
Methods; Difference in Difference Methods; Regression Discontinuity
Design; Synthetic Control Methods; Structural Causal Models; Causal The Contents of each offering will vary depending on the topics related
Forests; List Experiments and Natural Experiments; Qualitative to the science, policy and governance of climate change chosen for
Methods for Causal Inference. discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will be prepared by the
instructor with approval from the School prior to floating the course.
SpL741 Socio-Economic Data Analysis Participating students may expect to acquire policy insights by
3 Credits (3-0-0) undertaking detailed case studies and/or participating in field studies.
Data analysis basics; Challenges of dealing with real-world socio-
economic survey data; Introduction to R programming; Overview SpL783 Special Topics in Natural Resource Management
of nationally representative data sources in India; Background, policy
Review of important papers, Public Policy lessons and Hands-on Credits: 3 (3-0-0)
data analysis. The following datasets will be used: 1) Indian Census, Course Contents: The contents of each offering will vary depending
2) Demographics datasets like National Sample Surveys and India on the topics related to the science, policy and governance of climate
Human Development Surveys, 3) Health and Nutrition datasets change chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will
like National Health Surveys and District Level Household Surveys, be prepared by the instructor with approval form the School prior to
4) Education datasets like Annual Status of Education Report, 5) floating the course. Participation students may expect to acquire policy
Agriculture datasets like ICRISAT Village Dynamics in South Asia, 6) insights by undertaking detailed case studies and/or participating in
Manufacturing datasets like Annual Survey of Industries. field studies.
SpL750 Qualitative Research Methods for public policy
SpV791 Special Module on Ethics in policy Making
3 Credits (3-0-0)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
Theory (phenomenology, space, grounded theory etc.), ethical
The contents of each offering will vary depending on the policy
issues, positionality, qualitative data collection methods (including
topics chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will
ethnography, participant observation, interviews, focus groups,
be prepared by the instructor with approval from the school prior to
walk-along interviews, photo elicitation, community workshops,
floating the course. Participating students may expect to undertake
structured observation, place documentation etc.), tools for analysing
case studies and analyse proposed technologies and standards
qualitative data (coding methods, QDAS software (Nvivo or AtlasTi),
through a policy lens.
case study methodology, critical discourse analysis etc.), writing up
qualitative research
SpV792 Inclusive City and Accessibility Audit
SpL752 Techs and the City - An Urban policy perspective 1 Credit (1-0-0)
Introduction to Accessibility challenges, National and Global policy
3 Credits (3-0-0)
and status, United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
The location of urban policy amongst fields related to urban
with Disabilities (UNCRPD) & RPwD Act, Universal Design concept,
development. technology-policy-markets-development nexus. impact
Accessibility Audit, Assistive Technologies and conceptualization,
of industrial revolution on cities. globalisation and the internet. smart
Inclusive City framework Policy landscape for safe, accessible and
cities. tech giants as real estate developments. tech and the rental
inclusive city.
market. tech and public participation. city by algorithm (delivery.
gig work. ride sharing). digital divide. digitization of governance.
SpV793 Special Module on public policy in Management
transformations of public space (co-working. social media)
of Natural Resources
SpL753 Urban planning practicum 1 Credits (1-0-0)
4 Credits (2-0-4) The contents of each offering will vary depending on the policy
Delhi urban planning, Informal settlements, Lal-dora I urban village, topics chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will
public participation, deliberative democracy, Geddes, Jacobs, advocacy be prepared by the instructor with approval from the School prior to
planning, muddling through, collaborative planning, communicative floating the course. Participating students may expect to undertake
turn, power, panopticon, planning in the face of power, Arnstein's case studies and/or participate in field studies.
ladder of participation, metrics for evaluating participation, klesign-
SpV794 Special Module on public policy in Data,
organisation-implementation of a participatory planning exercise.
Communication and Computation
SpL754 Geographical Information Systems (GIS) for 1 Credit (1-0-0)
public policy
The contents of each offering will vary depending on the policy
3 Credits (2-0-2) topics chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will
360

Courses of Study 2024-2025 School of Public Policy
be prepared by the instructor with approval from the school prior to roads and highways, ports, shipping, inland waterways, green public
floating the course. Participating students may expect to undertake transport, logistics and civil aviation, For each sector, the need for
case studies and analyse proposed technologies and standards specific policy interventions, creation of the appropriate enabling
through a policy lens. environment, public private partnership arrangements, stakeholder
responses, implementation issues and technological innovations will
SpV795 Special Module on public policy for Technical be examined. The precise contents of each offering may vary.
Higher Education
SpV799 Special Module is policy Studies
1 Credit (1-0-0)
The contents of each offering will vary depending on the policy 1 Credit (1-0-0)
topics chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will For the particular domain, topic or issue chosen by the instructor
be prepared by the instructor with approval from the school prior to (e.g. climate change, energy, agriculture etc.) the course would aim
floating the course. Participating students may expect to undertake to familiarized students with key concepts in science and technology
case studies and/or participate in field studies. policy making. It would include studying various elements, actors and
stages in the policy process and critical perspectives on unpacking
SpV796 Special Module on public policy for Sustainable and understanding methods of policy analysis for the particular issue
Habits and Livelihoods chosen by the instructor.
1 Credit (1-0-0)
SpL810 Selected Topics in policy Studies
The contents of each offering will vary depending on the policy
topics chosen for discussion. A detailed course plan with topics will 3 Credits (3-0-0)
be prepared by the instructor with approval from the school prior to This course will introduce students to advanced topics in Policy Studies
floating the course. Participating students may expect to undertake as decided by the instructor.
case studies and/or participate in field studies.
SpD881 Mpp Major project-I
SpV797 Scenario Design for Managing Uncertainty
4 Credits (0-0-8)
1 Credit (1-0-0) Each Master’s research thesis would be unique and contents would
Defining a problem; risk and uncertainty; levels of uncertainty, be developed by the student under the supervision of advisor(s). A
commonly employed approaches to manage uncertainty; definition research committee consisting of supervisor, internal examiner, an
of a scenario; methods of constructing scenarios; the advantages of external expert and chairman would evaluate the thesis.
scenario analysis; examples of energy and climate scenarios; adaptive
decision making; application across different domains. SpD882 Mpp Major project-II
14 Credits (0-0-28)
SpV798 Special Module on public policy in Transport
Each Master’s research thesis would be unique and contents would
and Infrastructure
be developed by the student under the supervision of advisor(s). A
1 Credit (1-0-0) research committee consisting of supervisor, internal examiner, an
Several infrastructure sectors will be examined in detail, including external expert and chairman would evaluate the thesis.
361

Interdisciplinary M.Tech. programmes
M.Tech. programme in Optoelectronics and Optical Communications
JOp791 Laboratory-I (Fiber Optics and Opt. Comm. Lab) JOS795 Independent Study
3 Credits (0-0-6) 3 Credits (0-3-0)
JOp792 Laboratory-II (Fiber Optics and Opt. Comm.
JOV796 Selected Topics in photonics
Lab)
1 Credit (1-0-0)
3 Credits (0-0-6)
JOD801 Major project part-I
JOL793 Selected Topics-I
6 Credits (0-0-12)
3 Credits (3-0-0)
JOL794 Selected Topics-II JOD802 Major project part-II
3 Credits (3-0-0) 12 Credits (0-0-24)
M.Tech. programme in Cyber Security
JJCD891 Minor project SIV810 Special Module in Cyber Security
3 Credits (0-0-6 ) 1.5 Credits (1-0-1)
Research and development oriented projects based on problems Potential topics or themes which may be covered (one topic per
of practical and theoretical interest. Evaluation will be done based offering) include: Cybersecurity Standards & Compliance, Applied
on periodic presentations, student seminars, written reports, and Network Security, Cyber Physical Systems security, Application
evaluation of the developed system (if applicable). Security, Cloud Computing security, Software Security, Cybersecurity
Risk Management, Distributed systems design, Intrusion Detection
JCD892 M.Tech. project part-I Systems, Cryptography
6 Credits (0-0-12)
SIV814 Special Module in Application Security
The student will work on a challenging problem of practical or
theoretical interest in the area of computer security. He or she will 1.5 Credits (1-0-1)
design a prototype system or create a theoretical basis for his/her Overview of Web Applications, Introduction to Web Application
chosen problem. Security, Web Application vulnerabilities, OWASP Top 10, Security
Scanners & Interpreting Scan Reports, Protecting, Improving and
JCD893 M.Tech. project part-II some guidelines for Web Application Security.
12 Credits (0-0-24)
The student will complete the M.Tech Part-I project, and either SIV812 Special Module in Computer Forensics
develop a fully functional prototype or propose concrete theoretical 1.5 Credits (1-0-1)
results in the area of computer security. Introduction to Computer Forensics, Overview of hardware and
operating systems, Data recovery, Computer Forensic, Network
JCS816 Independent Study Forensic, Mobile Network Forensic, Software Reverse Engineering,
3 Credits (0-3-0) Computer crime and Legal issues.
The student will be tasked with certain reading assignments and
related problem solving in an appropriate area of research in Cyber SIL775 Biometric Security
Security under the overall guidance of a faculty member. Prior to 3 Credits (3-0-0)
registration, a detailed plan of work should be submitted by the
Prerequisite(s) :COL106/COL702
student to the Head of the Centre for approval.
Overview of Biometrics, benefits of biometrics over traditional
authentication systems,Biometric parameters, biometric matching
SIL618 Computer Architecture
methods and accuracy in biometric systems, Overview of Image
4 Credits (3-0-2)
Processing for Biometric Applications, Biometric system design
Overlaps with: COL216 (100%), ELL305(50%) challenges, Biometric recognition: Fingerprint, Face, Iris, Voice,
signature (offline and online), Multi-modal Biometric recognition
Prerequisite(s) :ELL201 or equivalent
Systems, Challenges to maintain cryptographic key, Biometrics
History of computers, Boolean logic and number systems, Assembly security of cryptographic keys.
language programming, ARM assembly language, Computer
Template Protection, Fuzzy Vault and its weaknesses and secure
arithmetic, Design of a basic processor, Microprogramming, Pipelining,
template management.
Memory system, Virtual memory, I/O protocols and devices,
Multiprocessors.
SIL773 Digital Watermarking and Steganography
SIL771 Special Topics in Cyber Security 3 Credits (3-0-0)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Prerequisite(s) : COL106 Data Structures and Algorithms/
Prerequisite(s) :COL334 Computer Network COL702 Advanced Data Structures
Cybersecurity Standards & Compliance, Applied Network Security, Introduction to Information Hiding, Steganography and Watermarking,
Application Security, Software Security , Cybersecurity Risk Digital Watermarking: Applications, techniques, models, watermarking
Management & Compliance, Mobile Device Management, Secure Unix detection techniques. Visible and invisible watermarks. Watermark
Administration, Introduction to Reverse Engineering, Insider Threats, security, digital watermark attacks, Steganography techniques in
Introduction to Digital Forensics. images, video, audio and documents, Security in Steganography,
362

Courses of Study 2024-2025
Pure key Steganography, Private key Steganography and Public key Cache Attacks, Testability and Verification of Cryptographic Hardware:
Steganography, Steganalysis - detection, extraction & recovery of Fault-tolerance of Cryptographic Hardware, Fault Attacks, Verification
message. of Finite-field Arithmetic Circuits, Modern IC Design and Manufacturing
Practices and Their Implications: Hardware Intellectual Property (IP)
SIL779 Data privacy Piracy and IC Piracy, Prevention of IP and IC Piracy, Hardware Piracy,
Model Building Attacks on PUFs, Hardware Trojans: Nomenclature and
3 Credits (3 -0-0)
Operating Modes, Countermeasures, Techniques for Trojan Detection,
Information Security and Privacy: the big picture, A gentle introduction Techniques to Increase Testing Sensitivity Infrastructure Security:
to cryptography, Certificates, PKI, Decentralized Trust Management, Impact of Hardware Security Compromise on Public Infrastructure,
Authentication – incl. authentication infrastructure and protocols, Defense Techniques.
Information Security: Legal landscape, Cybercrime, Information
Privacy: Concepts and Regulatory Landscape, Privacy Enhancing JCp781 Data Structures and Algorithms Lab
Technologies, Methods of tracking and de-identification (Breaking
1 Credit (0-0-2)
users' privacy: packet sniffing.,First-party data collection; third-party
data collection: how ad networks work; surveillance by ISPs., Tracking Prerequisite(s) :Computer programming. This course is to be
users: cookie tracking, ads., Understanding privacy threat models.), taken in conjunction with ELL781 and covers the lab component
Information Security as Risk management,Trusted Computing, Mobile of the theory covered there.
Security, Privacy and Big Data, Web Attacks, Systems Security, Social
This course is to be taken in conjunction with ELL781 and covers the
Networking and Privacy, Usable Security and Privacy.
lab component of the theory covered there viz Basics of algorithm
analysis. Elementary data structures. Hashing, Analysis of collision
SIL777 Secure programming Methodologies resolution techniques.Priority queues. Dynamic programming: rod
4 Credits (3-0-2) cutting problem, matrix multiplication, longest common sequence,
optimal binary search tree. Greedy algorithms: Huffman coding,
Prerequisite(s) : COL331, ELL405
activity selection problem, knapsack problem. Sparse Matrices
Language level vulnerabilities, secure programming techniques and manipulation. String matching, Matching DNA sequences.
approaches, input processing, code checking, security testing, the
integrity of modules, concurrent issues, random number generation JCp810 Cyber Security and Information Assurance Lab
and usage, security primitives, security code review, verification,
1 Credit (0-0-2)
recommended secure design practices.
Prerequisite(s) :To be taken in parallel with ELL810. This is for
SIL781 Secure Hardware-based System Design lab component of the topics covered in ELL810
This is a lab only course to be taken in conjunction with ELL810.
4 Credits (3-0-2)
The labs will be on topics covered therein viz Basics of computer
Prerequisite(s) : COL216, ELL305 and networks security along with vulnerabilities in existing software
Overview of Different Issues of Hardware Security, Useful interfaces, such as buffer overflows, unsafe libc functions, filesystem
Hardware Security Primitives: Cryptographic Hardware and their design issues, etc. The associated threat, attack, adversary models,
Implementation, Optimization of Cryptographic Hardware on FPGA, identity representation, management and access control, intrusion
Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) with implementations and detection, security at different levels: network, system, user, program
quality evaluation Side-channel Attacks on Cryptographic Hardware: security, network security, wireless security, mobile security, hardware
Basic Idea, Prevention, Improved Side-channel Attack Algorithms, security and the security of cyber physical systems.
M.Tech. programme in Robotics
JRL704 Foundation of Robotics Pre-requisite(s): For UG: AML140, MCL111 For non-ME PG:
3 Credits (1-0-4) MCL799
Type and components of robots, e.g., industrial robots, mobile Overlaps with: 65% with MCL747, MCL797 (proposed)
robots, UAVs, etc.; actuators and sensors used in robots; Definition The course contents will include lectures & hands-on experience
of mechanisms and manipulators; Degrees of freedom and mobility; covering: Degrees-of-Freedom and constraints, exactly constrained
Rotation representation; Coordinate transformation; DH parameters; design; design of elastic mechanisms/ flexures/ compliant.
Forward and inverse kinematics analyses; Basics of dynamics; State
mechanisms; constraint and mobility analysis using screw algebra;
variable model; Open and Closed Linear and Nonlinear control of
design for stiffness; friction. and hysteresis; actuators and sensors
robots; Feedback control; controllers (PI, PID, PD); Discretization;
for robotic application.
Finite State Machines; Processors: Architecture: ARM processors;
Robot operating system (ROS).
JRL780 Computer Vision for Robotics
JRL732 Aerial Robotics 4 Credits (3-0-2)
3 Credits (3-0-0) Pre-requisite(s): EC80
Pre-requisite(s): ELL225 or equivalent, ELL406/ELL704/ Overlaps with: COL780 (80%), ELL793 (65%)
MCL111/MCL738/MCL745/MCL795 (Kinematics and Control Camera models. Calibration, multi-views projective geometry and
of Robots) invariants. Feature detection, correspondence and tracking. 3D
structure/motion estimation. Application of machine learning in object
Introduction to aerial robots, system components (hardware and
detection and recognition, category discovery, scene and activity
software), kinematics and dynamics of aerial robots, position and
interpretation. Applications of Computer Vision.
attitude control design (linear and nonlinear), simulating quadrotor
flight using MATLAB and Gazebo environment, state estimation using
JRL880 Special Topics in Robotics I
observer design, localization and sensor fusion, introduction to motion
planning for aerial robots, control of multiple aerial robots 4 Credits (3-0-0)
Pre-requisite(s): Second year M.Tech.
JRL747 Degrees of Freedom and Constraints in Devices
The course will focus on specialised research topics in Robotics. This
2 Credits (2-0-0) may be related to any emerging Robotics techniques.
363

Interdisciplinary M.Tech. Programmes Courses of Study 2024-2025
JRL882 Special Topics in Robotics II The student will be tasked with reading assignments and related
2 Credits (2-0-0) problem-solving in an area of research in Robotics under the overall
supervision of a CoE-BIRD associated faculty member and may include
Pre-requisite(s): Second year M.Tech. a visitor. The work will be evaluated through exams and term paper.
The course will focus on specialised research topics in Robotics. This
may be related to any emerging Robotics techniques. JRV880 Special Module in Robotics
1 Credit (1-0-0)
JRS799 Independent Study
Pre-requisite(s): Second year M.Tech.
3 Credits (0-3-0)
The course will focus on specialised research topics in Robotics. This
Pre-requisite(s): Second year M.Tech. may be related to any emerging Robotics techniques.
364

4. Abbreviations
AY Academic Year
BAP Board of Academic Programmes
B.Tech. Bachelor of Technology
CGPA Cumulative Grade Point Average
CRC Centre Research Committee
DGPA Degree Grade Point Average
D.I.I.T. Diploma of I.I.T. Delhi
DRC Department Research Committee
EC Earned Credits
IRD Industrial Research and Development
M.B.A. Master of Business Administration
M.Des. Master of Design
M.Sc. Master of Science
M.S.(R) Master of Science (Research)
M.Tech. Master of Technology
PGS&R Postgraduate Studies and Research
Ph.D. Doctor of Philosophy
SGPA Semester Grade Point Average
SRC Student Research Committee (for M.S.(R) and Ph.D. student)
SRC Student Research Committee (in respect to School)
UGS Undergraduate Studies
PGS Postgraduate Studies
IDDC Industrial Design and Development Centre
ITMMEC Industrial Tribology Machine Dynamics and Maintenance Engineering Centre
EWS Economically Weaker Section
365

366
)selcyC
4
–
lareneG(
sgnimiT
tolS
.5
056-6
055-5
054-4
053-3
052-2
051-1
.oN
elcyC
0521-21
0511-11
0501-01
059-9
058-8
yaD
1EP
1ET
1
yadnoM
2FP
2FT
2
M
J
H
B
A
3CP
3BP
3
4DP
4DT
4AT
4
1DP
1DT
1AT
1
yadseuT
2EP
2ET
2
L
K
J
F
E
D
C
3FP
3FT
3
4CP
4BP
4 1
yadsendeW
2
ytivitcA
tcejorP
/
gniteeM
/
ranimeS
2GT
1GT
/ L
K
H
E
D
C
3 4
1CP
1BP
1
yadsruhT
2DP
2DT
2AT
2
M
H
F
B
A
3EP
3ET
3
4FP
4FT
4
1FP
1FT
1
yadirF
2CP
2BP
2
L
K
J
F
E
D
C
3DP
3DT
3AT
3
4EP
4ET
4
:etoN
.m.p
5-1
neewteb
yadsendew
no
osla
sessalc
lairotut
/
bal
evah
dluow
eludehcs
lairotut
/
bal
elcyc-eviF
.1
.emit
emas
eht
ta
lellarap
ni
ro
rehtegot
slairotut
evah
ot
spuorg
lla
ekil
dluow
taht
sesruoc
rof
stols
era
2GT
dna
1GT
.2

